Ethics and Corruption in EducationOksana Huss and Oleksandra Keudel
Open government in education: 
Clarifying concepts and mapping 
initiativesOpen government in education: 
Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesOpen government in education:  
Clarifying concepts  
and mapping initiatives
Oksana Huss
Oleksandra Keudel
International Institute
for Educational PlanningThe views and opinions expressed in this book are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the views of UNESCO or IIEP . The designations employed and the presentation 
of material throughout this review do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of UNESCO or IIEP concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city 
or area or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries.
This study was prepared under the supervision of Muriel Poisson, Programme Specialist at 
IIEP and T ask Manager of the Institute’s programme on Ethics and Corruption in Education.  
Published by:
International Institute for Educational Planning
7–9 rue Eugène Delacroix, 75116 Paris
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.org
ISBN: 978-92-803-1337-6
Cover photo: Courtesy of Shutterstock/Jason Gallant
Typesetting: Linéale Production
© UNESCO 2020  
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO  
(CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By 
using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the 
UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-
ccbysa-en). The present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication.
5
Presentation of the series:  
Ethics and Corruption in Education
Studies conducted over the last two decades have emphasized the 
negative impact of corruption on the economic, social, and political 
development of countries. Corruption increases transaction costs, reduces 
the efficiency of public services, distorts the decision-making process, and 
undermines social values. Moreover, corruption tends to contribute to the 
reinforcement of inequities by placing a disproportionate economic burden 
on the poor and limiting their access to public services. As a consequence, 
fighting corruption has become a major concern for policy-makers and actors 
involved in development.
A quick review of the literature highlights a number of global and 
sectoral attempts to tackle the issue of corruption. However, it appears that 
the education sector has not received adequate attention from national 
education authorities and donors, despite numerous grounds for prioritizing 
the challenge of combating corruption in education:
• Public sector reforms aimed at improving governance and limiting 
corruption-related phenomena cannot produce significant results unless 
adequate attention is paid to the education sector, as in most countries 
this constitutes the largest or second-largest public sector in both human 
and financial terms.
• Any attempt to ‘ensure inclusive and quality education for all and 
promote lifelong learning’ (Sustainable Development Goal 4) will be 
undermined if problems related to corruption, which have severe 
implications for the efficient use of resources and quality of education 
and school performance, are not properly addressed.
• Lack of integrity and unethical behaviour within the education sector 
are inconsistent with one of the primary aims of education: to produce 
‘good citizens’ respectful of the law, human rights, and equity. They are 6Presentation of the series: Ethics and Corruption in Education 
also incompatible with any strategy that considers education as a 
principal means of fighting corruption.
In this context, the UNESCO International Institute for Educational 
Planning (IIEP) launched in 2001 a comprehensive research and capacity-
building programme entitled ‘Ethics and Corruption in Education’ . 
Corruption is here defined as the systematic use of public office for private 
benefit that results in a reduction in the quality or availability of public goods 
and services. The main objective of this programme is to improve decision-
making and the management of education systems by integrating transparency 
and anti-corruption concerns into methodologies of planning and 
administration of education. 
The programme includes publications on topics such as formula funding 
of schools; decentralization and corruption; transparency in pro-poor 
education incentives; the adverse effects of private supplementary tutoring; 
the design and effective use of teacher codes of conduct; transparency in the 
book chain; and academic integrity. It also includes tools to help countries 
develop methodologies for assessing corruption in education, such as public 
expenditure tracking surveys or integrity assessments. More recently, it has 
paid specific attention to public access to information in education, with two 
new research projects devoted to open school data and open government in 
education.
Related resources are available on ETICO (http://etico.iiep.unesco.org), 
a dynamic clearing house for all information and activities related to 
transparency and accountability issues in education.
Jacques Hallak, Former IIEP Director, 
and Muriel Poisson, IIEP Programme Specialist7
Foreword 
Open government emerged about a decade ago and has gained momentum 
over the last few years, likely as a result of recent advances in information 
technology. It is based on the assumption that the rapid development of new 
technologies, combined with pressure for more transparent and accountable 
governments, will push countries to explore innovative approaches to 
sharing information with the public and consulting citizens and engaging 
them in education service delivery. Moreover, by helping to redefine 
citizen–government boundaries, it is believed that open government can 
help improve transparency and accountability in the management of public 
sectors (including the education sector) and, beyond that, the overall 
public administration culture. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development defines 
open government as transparency of government actions, accessibility of 
government services and information, and responsiveness of government to 
new ideas, demands, and needs. The Open Government Partnership 
identifies three major principles underlying this concept: information 
transparency, public engagement, and accountability. For its part, the 
European Commission emphasizes the principles of transparency, 
collaboration, and participation, building on open data, open services, and 
open decisions. Finally, the World Bank defines open government on the 
basis of the principles of transparency, citizen engagement and participation, 
and responsiveness. 
A cursory review suggests a dearth of literature on open government 
in the education sector and a lack of systematic identification of practical 
experiences within this framework. Moreover, there is no uniformity among 
definitions of ‘open government’ in the education sector and an absence of 
clarity regarding the various domains of open government observed in the 
educational field. There is also a growing need to evaluate the impact of the 
increasing number of open government initiatives developed across the 8
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativeseducation sector worldwide, and to analyse and draw lessons from the 
challenges and barriers associated with their implementation in order to 
allow them to achieve their full potential.
The challenge facing educational planners is huge – to pay due attention 
to open government concerns at each step of the policy and planning cycle. 
Each step in this cycle allows for varying degrees of citizen input and 
participation: during the first stage citizens can help identify the problem 
and discuss possible policy options; then during policy implementation they 
can monitor whether the policy is being implemented as planned, detect 
weaknesses and shortcomings, and contribute to the identification of 
solutions. However, citizens can also contribute actively to the evaluation of 
education policies and programmes through social audits, thereby 
complementing other more formal systems of ‘checks and balances to hold 
governments to account for their education commitments’ (UIS, 2018). 
In this context, IIEP has decided to launch a new research project 
entitled ‘Open government in education: Learning from experience’ as part 
of its 2018–21 Medium-T erm Strategy. Open government is understood 
here as the opening up of government data, processes, decisions, and control 
mechanisms to public involvement and scrutiny, with a view to ensuring 
inclusive and equitable quality education. It calls for renewed government–
citizen interaction and relies on the principles of transparency, citizen 
engagement, and participation, as well as government responsiveness. IIEP’s 
project aims to promote more responsive, effective, and innovative 
educational planning with a focus on citizen involvement. Its specific aims 
are as follows:
• to help formulate an understanding of what is meant by open 
government in the education sector;
• to explore perceptions of open government approaches in education 
among all major stakeholders;
• to establish a list of criteria that maximize the successful implementation 
of open government initiatives in education;
• to evaluate the impact of open government initiatives specifically as 
they relate to the aims set out in Sustainable Development Goal 4;9Foreword 
• to provide recommendations to education decision-makers and 
planners on how to make informed decisions about the design and 
implementation of open government policies in education.
This research contends that all three principles of open government – 
transparency, accountability, and citizen engagement – are pivotal to 
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 4. Open school data enable the 
public to verify that their governments spend money in a fair manner, which 
maximizes opportunities for marginalized populations to access education. 
Open procurement can deepen the level of transparency and accountability 
in education contract management, therefore ensuring that procured items 
(school equipment, textbooks, etc.) actually reach their beneficiaries. Open 
policy and planning promote the involvement of minorities in the formulation 
of policy, thereby ensuring that policies and curricula are more diverse and 
inclusive. Lastly, social audits, as a form of community monitoring, can help 
ensure that school resources are used in the correct manner.
In 2018, IIEP undertook exploratory work to better formulate what is 
meant by open government in the education sector, and to document and 
assess early, innovative initiatives developed in that field. On this basis, in 
2019 the Institute began eight case studies to illustrate the diversity of open 
government initiatives in education. Each case will prioritize one of the 
following aspects of open government: open policies, open budgets, open 
contracting, social audits, and crowdsourcing. The cases will combine the 
following data collection methods: the gathering of contextual information 
using secondary data related to the programmes/initiatives under review, a 
qualitative inquiry with semi‐structured interviews, focus-group discussions, 
participatory observation, and a large‐scale quantitative inquiry involving 
the distribution of 250 questionnaires to school actors using a multi‐level 
stratified sampling method. In addition IIEP designed a global survey to 
review existing open government initiatives in education worldwide, to be 
completed in 2020.
This first publication under this project represents an attempt to clarify 
the conceptual confusion around the term ‘open government’ and to 
formulate a working definition for the field of education. It also reviews the 10
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiatives‘theory of change’ that links open government and corruption, and conducts 
an initial mapping of promising and innovative initiatives of open government 
in education. On the basis of a conceptual and empirical overview, it provides 
empirical frameworks for further research and draft policy recommendations. 
The publication builds on academic sources, reports from international 
organizations, and the work of renowned non-governmental organizations 
in the field. It also provides a conceptual basis for the development of IIEP’s 
new research devoted to the topic. 
IIEP would like to thank the authors, Oksana Huss and Oleksandra 
Keudel, for their valuable contributions.
Muriel Poisson11
Contents
List of tables, figures, and boxes 13
List of abbreviations 15
Executive summary 17
Introduction 19
Chapter 1. Open government: Old concept, new dynamics 22
1.1 A historic perspective on transparency and citizen 
participation 22
1.2 Citizen participation in early education planning 24
1.3 The role of information and communications technologies 26
1.4 Current developments 28
Chapter 2. Conceptualizing open government: Definitions,  
mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 32
2.1 Defining open government 32
2.2 T ransparency 33
2.3 Citizen participation and collaboration 42
2.4 Accountability and responsiveness 47
Chapter 3. Dimensions and objectives of open government 53
3.1 Dimensions of open government 53
3.2 Objectives of open government 58
Chapter 4. ‘Theory of change’: Why and how does open government 
influence corruption? 63
4.1 Corruption as a principal–agent problem 65
4.2 Corruption as a collective action problem 66
4.3 Implementing open government when corruption 
is a collective action problem 6812
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesChapter 5. Operationalizing open government 70
5.1 A working definition of open government 70
5.2 The specifics of open government in education: A sectoral 
approach 70
5.3 Operationalizing open government in the education sector: 
Working definition, tools, and objectives 77
Chapter 6. Local governance and a contextual approach  
to open government 82
6.1 The local governance approach to open government 82
6.2 An overview of contextual factors for open government 86
Chapter 7. Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 90
7.1 Open government dimensions in education 94
7.2 Open government and functions of participation 101
7.3 Open government dimensions and the policy cycle 103
7.4 Open contracting and the Bogotá School Feeding 
Programme: An example of an open government process 105
Chapter 8. Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open  
government in education 109
8.1 T argeted principles and primary mechanisms of open 
government 109
8.2 Short-term outcomes of open government 113
8.3 Medium-term outcomes of open government 115
8.4 Impacts of open government initiatives 124
Conclusion 125
Annex 1. Open government definitions 129
Annex 2.  Corruptions Perception Index (CPI) of countries represented  
in the surveyed cases 137
Annex 3.  Overview of the cases identified through  
an extensive review of the literature (including sources) 138
Annex 4. Details of online portals with school data 142
Annex 5.  Summary table of available information  
on the medium-term outcomes of the OG initiatives identified 146
References 15713
T ables, figures, and boxes
T ables
T able 1. Future trends in policy analysis relevant to open  
government 30
T able 2. Summarizing historic developments and identifying  
current tendencies 31
T able 3. Open government definitions 34
T able 4. Methods of citizen participation at different stages  
of the policy cycle 45
T able 5. Open government dimensions by government function  
and open government principles 56
T able 6. Steps to a successful open government initiative 64
T able 7. Governance context of corruption practices 67
T able 8. Open government principles aligned with government 
functions, and project examples  92
T able 9. Overview of online platforms among surveyed cases 98
T able 10. Context-specific features of surveyed cases and initiatives  
and focus in the policy cycle 112
T able 11. Outcomes of selected open government initiatives 
in Context A (corruption as an exception) 117
T able 12. Outcomes of selected open government initiatives 
in Context B (corruption as the norm) 119
T able 13. Summary of the recorded impacts of surveyed open 
government initiatives 12314
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesFigures
Figure 1. Open governance framework 54
Figure 2. Open government results chain 62
Figure 3. Working definition of open government 72
Figure 4. Corruption risks in education 75
Figure 5. Working definition of open government in education 79
Figure 6. Open government in education, based on the principle  
of the best interests of the child (PBIC) 81
Figure 7. The open contracting process within the Bogotá School 
Feeding Programme, according to the working definition  
of open government 107
Boxes
Box 1. Legislative framework for transparency in education  
in Australia 37
Box 2. Indonesia: Moving to open school data on the government  
and civil society side 40
Box 3. Citizen sourcing of issues in education in Medellín, Colombia 46
Box 4. Horizontal and vertical accountability in education 49
Box 5. Codes of conduct in secondary and higher education 49
Box 6. Summary: Conceptualizing open government principles 51
Box 7. Variety of social audits in education: Report cards and social 
audits of budgets 58
Box 8. Participatory budgeting in New Y ork City (PBNYC) (2012) 96
Box 9. ‘Improve Y our School’ , Mexico (2013) 100
Box 10. Poitou-Charentes region school participatory  
budgeting (2005–14) 10415
Abbreviations
ACARA  Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority
API application programming interface
CCE  Colombia Compra Eficiente (procurement monitoring 
agency)
COGES  Comités de gestion des établissements scolaires (school 
committees in Niger)
CPI Corruption Perceptions Index
CSO civil society organization
EDUCO  Programme for Education with Community Participation, El 
Salvador
EU European Union
FONACIDE  National Public Investment and Development Fund, Paraguay
G&PA government and public administration
GCSE General Certificate of Secondary Education
ICT information and communications technology
IIEP UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning 
NGO non-governmental organization
NYCSCA New Y ork City School Construction Authority
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OG open government
OGP Open Government Partnership
PBNYC Participatory Budgeting New Y ork City
PETS Public Expenditure T racking Surveys 
PNE National Education Plan, Brazil
QSDS Quantitative Service Delivery Surveys16
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesSBM school-based management
SIC Superintendency for Industry and Commerce, Colombia
SOA service-oriented architecture
SRC school report card
SSA Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (Education for All), India
UK United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
UN United Nations
UNESCO  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USA United States of America
VEC village education committee17
Executive summary
Although the idea of open government (OG) is increasingly met with in 
countries around the world, there has been no systematized overview of 
OG implementation in the education sector. This study seeks to fill this gap 
by answering the following question: How does open government affect the 
education sector? It pays specific attention to the role of local governments 
and the active use of new technologies for citizen participation.
An analysis of definitions shows that, at its core, open government 
consists of three interwoven components: transparency, citizen participation 
and collaboration, and accountability and responsiveness. Open government 
is often used as an umbrella term for different mechanisms applied to fulfil 
the functions of transparency, citizen participation, and accountability. It is 
also a dynamic process that serves as a tool to reach predefined targets. Any 
impact evaluation of open government depends on the interests of the main 
stakeholders defined at the beginning of the process. Major risks and 
challenges to the success of open government increase if the development 
of separate components, especially transparency in the form of open data, 
becomes the main or sole objective. Instead, the attainment of transparency, 
participation, and accountability are all essential outcomes for achieving the 
longer-term impacts of a successful OG process. 
Open government is defined in this study as a principal-centred process 
of governance  aimed at creating public value in a partnership between public 
authorities and citizens. The term ‘partnership’ includes citizen participation 
and collaboration, which is impossible without meaningful transparency 
and is only effective under conditions where accountability and government 
responsiveness are in place. ‘Public value’ , as the long-term objective of open 
government, implies that concrete stakeholders, as a group of beneficiaries 
among the general public, must be identified at the beginning of the process. 
The interests and needs of the main stakeholders define the nature of the 
desired public value at the end of the OG process, as well as the value-
generating mechanisms required to reach it. Open government in education  18
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesis a process of governance, based on the principle of ‘the best interests of the 
child’ , that aims to ensure inclusive, equitable, high-quality education for all 
through partnership between the main stakeholders in the education system.
The mapping of OG dimensions across six world regions has 
demonstrated that, in education, national policy-making remains key, with 
subnational and local-level initiatives gaining momentum. Analysis of the 
mapped cases suggests that the choice of OG dimensions and targeted OG 
principles is context specific: in countries with occasional corruption, open 
government is mostly used to gather information about stakeholders’ needs 
relevant to education, while in countries with systemic corruption, 
participatory initiatives often target the implementation of a policy or the 
monitoring thereof. Although socio-economic factors may determine 
opportunities and barriers for relevant stakeholders (e.g. parents, teachers, 
suppliers of education-related services, and school administrations) in terms 
of participation in open government, actual participation is increased by 
targeted awareness-raising and capacity-building efforts. Collaboration 
between governments and civil society organizations (CSOs) is critical to 
ensuring stakeholder mobilization and the implementation of OG 
mechanisms.19
Introduction
The concept of open government is increasingly applied in public policy 
around the world. However, there is as yet no systematized overview of 
OG implementation in the education sector, including its advantages and 
possible risks. T o fill this gap, this publication seeks to answer the following 
question: How does open government affect the education sector? Specific 
attention is paid to the role of cities and local governments in this regard, as 
well as the active development of new technologies.
The task of this publication is fourfold: first, it reviews the literature in 
order to clarify the conceptual confusion around the term ‘open government’ 
and provide a working definition. This working definition is then applied to 
open government in the education sector. Second, it elaborates a ‘theory of 
change’ that links open government and corruption. Third, it maps out and 
assesses the specific contextual characteristics of 34 diverse and recent OG 
initiatives in education worldwide. And fourth, on the basis of this conceptual 
and empirical overview, it provides analytical tools and empirical frameworks 
for further research.
The publication draws on academic sources, documents, and reports of 
international organizations and international programmes, as well as the work 
of renowned non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the field. In 
particular, the conceptual overview of the term ‘open government’ has been 
elaborated on the basis of definitions by the Council of Europe, the European 
Union (EU), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD), the Open Government Partnership (OGP), the United States  of 
America (USA), and the World Bank. Critical analysis of the core OG 
principles and objectives – transparency, participation and collaboration, and 
accountability and responsiveness – was conducted, based on academic 
research and recent literature reviews on open government. Then, based on 
this critical approach to OG conceptualization, the research team developed 
a working model of the OG process ( Chapters  2–5 ), which was applied to the 20
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesempirical analysis of open government in the education sector. Analysis of 
empirical cases was undertaken using a method of comparison, with specific 
attention paid to case context, short- and medium-term objectives, and impact.
The mapping of empirical cases employed maximum variation sampling 
to cover all theoretical dimensions of open government and to identify the 
widest possible range of OG mechanisms in education, while covering as 
many world regions as possible. Preference was given to recent cases (2010 
or later), while some older cases were included for the purposes of reference. 
Research sources included state-of-the-art reports and case studies on 
transparency, participation, and accountability in education from 
international organizations, such as the OECD and the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), case studies 
and reports from CSOs specializing in OG mechanisms, and scholarly articles 
incorporating experimental impact assessments of OG initiatives. The 
mapping resulted in the identification of 34 cases in 26 countries from 6 
world regions. While the majority of these cases occur at the national level, 
the process also worked to identify city and subnational cases. 
The procedure used for case selection sought to obtain a wide theoretical 
variation,1 taking into account the following constraints. First, owing to the 
language capacities of the authors, only sources in English, German, French, 
Spanish, and Ukrainian were considered. Second, the majority of recent cases 
did not usually contain assessments of medium-term goals and impacts, and 
thus were included to describe trends in open government in education but 
could not be used to assess their effectiveness. Third, once maximum 
theoretical variation was achieved, the search for cases ceased, thus some 
cases of OG mechanisms known to the reader may not be covered here. 
Despite these constraints, the case mapping provides a useful overview of 
trends in open government in education and allows preliminary conclusions 
to be drawn about related opportunities and obstacles in the education sector.
The publication consists of three sections: the first presents a critical 
reflection on available OG definitions (Chapters  1–3); the following section  
1. Theoretical framework from which to explore possible variations in experience and results. 21Introduction
explores the operationalization of the OG concept  (Chapters 4–6); and the 
last section consists of an empirical analysis of OG cases in the education 
sector (Chapters 7 and 8). 
Chapter  1 provides a historic overview of open government with a view 
to reflecting on current innovations and future trends. 
Chapter  2 is dedicated to OG core principles. Specifically, it defines 
three OG pillars – transparency, citizen participation and collaboration, and 
accountability and responsiveness – including their functions and 
mechanisms, and an assessment of risks and challenges. 
Chapter  3 elaborates OG dimensions in line with government functions 
and discusses different stages of OG objectives. 
Chapter  4 elaborates a theory of change for OG implementation in two 
different contexts: where corruption is an exception and where corruption 
is the norm in governance. Chapters 5  and 6  provide the link between theory 
and empirical case analysis, and list particularities of open government in 
the education sector and further contextual specifics.
Chapter  7 structures the results of mapping OG initiatives in education 
based on OG dimensions, links them to the theoretical functions of 
participation, and identifies the stage of policy cycle at which these initiatives 
occur. The chapter ends with an example of the application of a working 
definition of open government to a case of open contracting for a school 
feeding programme in Bogotá (Colombia). 
Chapter  8 continues with the context-specific analysis of major patterns 
in open government in education, highlighting how diverging preferences 
for particular OG mechanisms exist in two distinct contexts of corruption. 
The chapter also reviews short- and medium-term outcomes of OG initiatives 
in the education sector and their impact. 
The final chapter of the publication lists the main conclusions.22
Chapter 1
Open government: Old concept,  
new dynamics
The current wave of interest in open government is by no means new – 
the idea of transparency and citizen participation developed decades ago. 
However, analysis of historic trends enables the identification of some 
innovations in recent developments.
In general, the concept of open government reflects two main 
components: transparency and citizen participation. The meaning of these 
concepts has varied throughout history, while shifting debates about why 
transparency and citizen participation are needed have influenced the 
implementation of transparency and participation policies. 
1.1 A historic perspective on transparency and citizen 
participation
Although modern notions of transparency and participation date back to 
the 18th and 19th centuries (Mansuri and Rao, 2013: 3), the critical and 
active discussion around their necessity and implementation became more 
practical in nature during the 1950s, especially in the USA. In the context 
of post-war opacity, journalists and newspaper editors became the main 
source of pressure for greater openness on the part of the government. A 
1953 report, commissioned by the American Society of Newspaper Editors, 
entitled ‘The people’s right to know: Legal access to public records and 
proceedings’ , paved the way for The Open Government Principle: Applying 
the Right to Know under the Constitution (Parks, 1957) and the 1967 
Freedom of Information Act (Yu and Robinson, 2012: 184 ff.). Against 
this background, the concept of open government emerged as ‘a synonym 
for public access to previously undisclosed government information’ (Yu 
and Robinson, 2012: 186). The main objective for opening access to public 23Open government: Old concept, new dynamics 
information was fostering government accountability and responsibility to 
act in the public interest.
The discussion around citizen participation evolved in parallel to 
developments in the concept and practice of governmental transparency. 
The context for citizen participation was the perceived crisis of democracy. 
David Hart (1972) discussed citizen participation in the early 1970s as one 
of two possible solutions to the crisis of democratic institutions in the USA. 
One possibility was to strengthen representative democracy; the other was 
to replace it with participatory democracy. The author focused on the 
objective of citizen participation, which aims to enable better services for 
relevant ‘client publics’ .2
In 1969, Sherry R. Arnstein substantiated the need for ‘participation 
of the governed’ as ‘the cornerstone of democracy’ (Arnstein, 1969: 216). 
She discussed participation as an opportunity for ‘powerless’ groups to 
challenge inequity and injustice. Accordingly, Arnstein defines participation 
as ‘the redistribution of power that enables the “have-not citizens,” presently 
excluded from the political and economic processes, to be deliberately 
included in the future’ (Arnstein, 1969: 216). Importantly, she highlights 
the ‘critical difference’ between an ‘empty ritual of participation’ that allows 
power holders to claim that all sides were considered and to maintain the 
status quo and ‘real power to affect the outcome of the process’ (Arnstein 
1969: 216). T o clarify this crucial difference, Arnstein developed ‘the ladder 
of citizen participation’ , which identifies eight grades of citizen empowerment 
ranging from non-participation (manipulation and therapy) to information 
and consultation (allowing ‘have-nots’ to hear and have a voice), all the way 
to the highest degree of citizen power (achieved through partnership, 
delegated power, and citizen control). Arnstein’s ladder combines the 
concepts of transparency and citizen participation and shows that access to 
public information is only an intermediate stage to reaching a partnership 
between citizens and government. 
2. Customers of a non-business organization who ‘consume’ its goods or services (www.businessdictionary.com).24
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiatives1.2 Citizen participation in early education planning
Owing to its immediate relevance for citizens, the education sector appears 
to be an experimental field for citizen participation, especially at the local 
level. Koopman and Isbister link increasing citizen participation in school 
affairs after the Second World War to the increase in wealth, greater interest 
in schools, population mobility, and the rise in mass media communication. 
The authors note that education is ‘a matter of great public concern’ , and 
therefore should be planned by all members of the community (1958: 425). 
For educators, the aim of participation in the form of citizen committees is 
to foresee the educational needs of the community and to control planning. 
Another approach – the so-called community school approach – assumes 
that citizens will become a part of continuous efforts to improve schools 
and will gain a strong sense of ownership. The authors suggest that citizens 
need to participate in fields that encompass the general role and nature of 
educational institutions, the content of curricula, and polices related to 
personnel. 
Marlyn Gittell (1972) traces the history of citizen participation in 
shaping educational policies in American public schools to early 1900, and 
the new wave of immigration and expanding school populations. Historically, 
the aim of participation was twofold: first, to bring curricula innovation to 
school programmes in order to adapt to the challenges of immigration; and 
second, to increase the level of professionalism in a school system that was 
plagued by patronage. Gittell argues that ‘[q]uality public education without 
the involvement and participation of the consumers is a contradiction in 
terms’ (1972: 684). The article raises the issue of conflict between community 
participation and professional governance of the field, which is still relevant 
in the current literature. It also states that communities need greater control 
over educational institutions in order to achieve a proper balance between 
professionalism and public participation in the policy process.
In the early 1970s, international organizations also began to explore 
participatory planning in education. In a paper published by the UNESCO 
International Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP), Grassie (1974) 
provided a theoretical framework for the decision-making process in the 25Open government: Old concept, new dynamics 
education sector, taking into consideration citizen participation. According 
to Grassie, the aim of participatory planning is to obtain feedback from 
citizens about their interests and needs, so that administrators can deliver 
their services accordingly. This planning approach allows administrators to 
study the needs of clients and to forward them to policy-makers in the form 
of suggestions and ideas for new policies. 
Participation, persuasion, decision, implementation, evaluation – these 
constitute the continuous cycle of processes by means of which an organization 
is able to provide a continually improving service to its client èle. The client èle 
is not usually one body with a common view of its needs but, more often, 
consists of a multiplicity of groups each with its own peculiar view of what is 
required and of priorities. It is the difficult task of the policy-maker, thereafter, 
to decide ‘who gets what and when’ (Grassie, 1974: 11).
This paper provides a clear indication that the education policy planning 
and feedback process is organized around the principal–agent concept, 
whereby citizens are the principal, and the government represents an agent 
that is elected or appointed to provide a public service to citizens. 
Around the same time, a document on participatory planning produced 
by the OECD noted that ‘the idea of participatory planning for education is 
emerging as a central and unifying concept’ (Beresford, 1974: 13). The stated 
purpose of participatory planning is to tackle the challenges that traditional 
institutional boundaries face. According to the author, these challenges 
include changing the perception of children and youth and rethinking the 
relationship between education and society. New perceptions emerging as 
part of increasing demand for education worldwide entail ‘loosening up the 
usual time, space and place boundaries for education’ (Beresford, 1974: 13). 
In this context, participatory planning activities are deemed to influence 
policy-making and the actual implementation of programmes, with a view 
to disseminating innovation developments, or the demand for them, in 
education. 
An early example of a study of participatory planning beyond OECD 
countries examines school mapping in the Lok Jumbish project, India 
(Govinda, 1999). The technique of school mapping, initially developed in 26
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesFrance in the early 1960s, empowered local communities in India to ‘decide 
on the location of future schools and means to be allocated at the institutional 
level’ (Govinda, 1999: 13). This project highlights the importance of the 
process as much as the product: 
The important thing is that the community and parents feel responsible for 
its preparation and are committed to its implementation. This is necessary 
to break the cultural blockages which are responsible for continuously low 
enrolment (Govinda, 1999: 17). 
The villagers carried out the planning process themselves, an approach 
that shifted the focus from the supply of provisions to the demand for services. 
While traditional school mapping has functioned as a tool for centralized 
decision-making, the Lok Jumbish project transformed this technique into 
a tool for decentralized decision-making (Govinda, 1999: 152).
1.3 The role of information and communications technologies
The rapid development of information and communications technologies 
(ICT s) in the 1990s significantly influenced the concept of open government 
(Wirtz and Birkmeyer, 2015: 391), in particular through its closeness to the 
ideas of open data (Yu and Robinson, 2012) and e-government (Linders, 
2012). Widespread access to the internet worldwide massively improved 
options for sharing, analysing, and using timely governmental data for public 
use and coordinated participation activities (Kossow and Dykes, 2018a). 
In terms of data sharing, governments can now provide timely information 
(e.g. live broadcasting of voting procedures) and information in the form of 
big data for public use. Analytics of big data provided by tax authorities and 
procurement data, in combination with data about bidding companies (e.g. 
identifying the beneficiary owner of a company), can uncover corruption, 
provide evidence of fraud, and make public expenditures more efficient 
(e.g. Dávid-Barrett, 2017).
In addition, the digitalization and automation of public services 
(e-government) both increase government efficiency in the delivery of public 
services and decrease corruption risks by reducing face-to-face interactions 27Open government: Old concept, new dynamics 
between citizens and public servants. Blockchain and bitcoin technologies 
currently represent the most disruptive digital innovations, with significant 
potential to improve transparency and the accountability of public services 
if the associated risks are properly managed (Kossow and Dykes, 2018b). In 
addition, social media and electronic tools such as e-petitions or complaint 
mechanisms enable the consolidation and coordination of activities by a 
broad range of citizens to represent collective interests to public authorities. 
Against this backdrop of technological developments, ‘the adjective 
“open” has become a powerful, compact prefix that captures information 
technologies’ transformative potential to enhance the availability and 
usefulness of information’ (Yu and Robinson, 2012: 187). However, recent 
years have seen an increase in critical voices targeting the extensive use of 
OG data. As Yu and Robinson note, the term ‘open’ has blurred the 
distinction between the technologies of open data and the politics of open 
government (2012: 193). The authors point out that open government and 
open data can each exist independently of the other: government can be 
transparent without new technologies and can also provide open data on 
neutral politics and remain ‘deeply opaque and unaccountable’ (Yu and 
Robinson, 2012:  181). In fact, this is a discussion about the paradox of 
transparency, where superficial commitments to open data are used as a 
façade to avoid government accountability (Weinstein and Goldstein, 2012). 
As a response to these critics, a recent wave of academic literature and 
analyses by international organizations has focused primarily on the 
qualitative preparation and usability of available data. According to the 
OECD,
as the global maturity of open data has grown, so has the awareness of the 
need to foster a culture of value creation and problem-solving approaches . These 
can help target efforts to release valuable data for re-use, and prioritise 
improved government rather than aiming simply to provide more data. The 
concept of ‘publish with purpose’ is what best represents this new emerging 
discussion (OECD, 2018a: 15).28
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesIn other words, there has been a shift from ICT-based open data and 
e-government as a goal, to the understanding of technology as a possible 
tool for problem-solving.
1.4 Current developments
From the USA to the international development agenda
In remarks on the history of participatory development, Mansuri and Rao 
(2013) highlight the central role of the USA in spreading the concept of 
open government worldwide. During the 1950s and 1960s, the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID) funded and 
promoted cooperative institutions, community-based development, and 
decentralization. In the 1970s, the focus of policy shifted to large-scale 
investment in agricultural and industrial growth; however, by the mid-
1980s activists and scholars had attacked this approach as inherently 
disempowering and biased against the interests of the poor. These critiques 
in combination with the intellectual contributions of economists such as 
Ostrom (1990) in favour of bottom-up and deliberative development led 
to renewed interest among donors and governments in community-based 
development, decentralization, and participation (Mansuri and Rao, 2013: 
3). As a result, from the early 1990s international organizations began to 
actively fund participatory approaches.
From a focus on (representative) democracy to the quality of 
public services 
In the post-war period, open government and citizen participation targeted 
mainly the shortcomings of representative democracy (e.g. by giving a voice 
to marginalized groups and reducing patronage in education). Associated 
projects in the 1990s, however, indicate a shift towards targeting the 
ineffectiveness of public administration as the main driver. Owing to rapid 
social, economic, and technological developments in the late 20th century, 
governments appeared ‘increasingly out of step with a changing society 
which had new and different expectations’ (OECD, 2005: 10). Such new 
expectations made governments more performance focused, while the key 29Open government: Old concept, new dynamics 
principles of accountability and public focus (instead of private interest) 
retained their importance (OECD, 2005: 11–12). 
As an example, Fung and Wright analysed innovations in empowered 
participatory governance in the early 1990s as a response to the ineffectiveness 
of mechanisms of political representation (2003: 5). They studied five early 
experiments in empowered participatory governance: neighbourhood 
governance councils in Chicago; the Wisconsin Regional T raining 
Partnership; Habitat Conservation Planning under the Endangered Species 
Act; the participatory budget of Porto Alegre, Brazil; and panchayat  reforms 
in West Bengal and Kerala, India. On the basis of their empirical findings 
(2003: 15–16), the authors highlighted three general principles fundamental 
to all these experiments: (i) practical orientation with a focus on specific, 
tangible problems; (ii) bottom-up participation with the involvement of 
ordinary people affected by these problems and the officials close to them; 
and (iii) the deliberative development of solutions to these problems. The 
authors also identified three institutional objectives for empowered 
participatory governance: effective problem-solving, equity, and broad and 
deep participation. 
From new public management to the partnership paradigm
The development of the public administration discipline influenced 
the discussion about the nature of the relationship between public 
administration and citizens. Early literature on participation from the 1960s 
until the 1990s indicates that citizens were treated as customers and the 
aim of participation was to collect information about their needs. This idea 
of client–agent relations between the public administration and citizens is 
inherent to the concept of new public management (NPM). Early projects 
in the 1990s, however, reflect a shift towards partnership relations between 
public administrations and citizens (Linders, 2012; Vigoda, 2002), and the 
concept of participation changed accordingly. While the NPM approach 
focuses on the importance of involvement and consultation with citizens 
in order to learn about their needs, the partnership paradigm goes much 
further, with government and the public administration relying on the 
expertise of citizens and their engagement in policy-making. 30
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesFuture trends in open government policy
Scholars and experts of the T ransparency and Accountability Initiative3 have 
provided an intermediate assessment of OG activities since the late 1990s, 
allowing for the identification of future trends and providing suggestions 
for further improvements. On the basis of this assessment, they highlight 
a ‘second-generation’ approach to the implementation of transparency 
and accountability as core principles of open government. A comparison 
between the first and second generation is provided in T able 1.
T able 1. Future trends in policy analysis relevant to open government
Characteristics of first-generation efforts  
to implement transparency 
and accountabilityCharacteristics of second-generation 
efforts to implement transparency 
and accountability
Inadequate attention to particularities of 
local contextsDeeper understanding of local contexts
Short-term projects Longer-term, more iterative, ‘organic’ engagements
Blanket assumption regarding the value of 
transparencyGreater focus on how transparency translates into 
accountability
Fascination with technological tools, treating 
them as ends in themselvesViewing technological tools as means, not ends; 
experimenting with multiple tools
Act first, learn later Greater attention to accumulating and applying 
learning
Tactical aims that only target and remove 
symptoms of the problemStrategic approaches that aim to resolve the core 
problem
Small-scale, fragmented efforts Building larger movements and coalitions
Source: Carothers (2016: 40).
In summary, the historic analysis of transparency and citizen 
participation has identified changes in the meaning, objectives, tools, and 
geography of the OG concept. These changes are summarized in T able 2.
3. The Transparency and Accountability Initiative is a group of funders committed to working towards a world where 
citizens are informed and empowered; governments are open and responsive; and collective action advances the public 
good (www.transparency-initiative.org/).31Open government: Old concept, new dynamics 
T able 2. Summarizing historic developments and identifying current 
tendencies
Post-war period Current developments
(since the late 1990s)
Meaning • Open government as a 
narrow concept focused on 
access to public information 
• Citizen participation 
developed as a separate idea• Open government as a broad 
and complex concept that 
combines transparency, 
participation, and 
collaboration as minimum 
requirements
• Most definitions also include 
accountability and/or 
responsiveness as a third 
component
Objectives Respond to the shortcomings of 
(representative) democracyRespond to the shortcomings 
of democracy (corruption, low 
trust, bad governance) and to the 
ineffectiveness of public services 
Tools Physical access to documents 
(transparency) and face-to-face 
participationUse of ICT-driven open data and 
e-government in addition to face-
to-face participation
Interaction: government 
& public administration 
(G&PA) and citizensFrom citizens as voters and 
G&PA as trustees to citizens as 
clients/ customers and G&PA as 
the managerCitizens and G&PA as partners
Geography US-centred paradigm International/global paradigm
Source: Authors. 32
Chapter 2
Conceptualizing open government:  
Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities
The aim of this chapter is threefold: first, to review existing documentation 
and academic literature on the concept of open government; second, to 
identify core components and main mechanisms for the implementation 
of open government; and third, to discuss risks and unintended impacts 
that OG mechanisms might hide.
2.1 Defining open government
Open government can mean different things depending on the stakeholder 
perspective. A recent OECD report on open government indicates 
that only half of analysed countries (35 OECD member states and 18 
other countries) with an OG strategy introduced and used an official 
governmental definition, while 30 per cent created their own definition and 
21 per cent of governments adopted one from external sources (2016: 1). 
The most widespread and recent definitions of open government used 
by international organizations and some governments are summarized in 
T able 3. An overview of international OG definitions is presented in more 
detail in Annex 1. 
This overview reaffirms the diversity of definitions. Nevertheless, it is 
possible to identify core characteristics and principles common to the concept 
of open government. First, most definitions consider open government to be 
a governance process rather than an aspect of the status quo. For instance, the 
World Bank defines open government as ‘citizen-centric governance, with 
openness as a central pillar’ (World Bank, 2015), while the OECD definition 
refers to ‘a culture of governance’ (OECD, 2017: 1). Second, open government 
is a collective term that encompasses several interdependent components. For 
instance, the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of 33Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
Europe4 states that open government is ‘an umbrella term for a wide range of 
practices’ (Galster, 2018: 7). Similarly, the US Memorandum on T ransparency 
defines open government as ‘a system’ of transparency, public participation, 
and collaboration (White House, 2009: 4685). Third, all definitions have two 
components in common – transparency and engagement of citizens. However, 
there are slight variations with regard to the third component and the strategic 
objectives of open government.
The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities and the OECD 
differentiate between open government and the concept of an ‘open state’ 
(Galster, 2018: 7; OECD, 2017: 1). While open government refers to the 
relations between government, public administrations, and citizens, the open 
state concept extends open government to initiatives that target other 
powerful institutions, such as parliament, the judiciary, and independent 
public institutions. At any rate, both concepts are closely interwoven. 
2.2 T ransparency
T ransparency describes ‘the extent to which government makes available the 
data and documents the public needs in order to assess government action 
and exercise voice in decision making’ (Harrison et  al., 2012:  87). For the 
most part, definitions of transparency correspond to requirements regarding 
the publication of data. For example, the European Commission in a recent 
report states that ‘transparency refers to disclosing relevant documents and 
other information on government decision making and government activity 
to the general public in a way that is relevant, accessible, timely, and accurate’ 
(Bremers and Deleu, 2016: 11; see also: Bauhr and Grimes, 2017: 433 ff.; 
De Ferranti et  al., 2009: 7; Orszag, 2009:  2; White House, 2009:  1). The 
European Commission report elaborates further: 
Relevant and accessible implies that information should be comprehensible, 
in an appropriate format (for reuse) and tailored to the specific need of 
4. The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities is an institution of the Council of Europe, responsible for strengthening 
local and regional democracy in its 47 member states and assessing the application of the European Charter of Local 
Self-Government. The Congress is made up of two chambers: the Chamber of Local Authorities and the Chamber of 
Regions. It has 324 representatives and 324 substitutes, all appointed for four years, representing over 200,000 local 
and regional authorities in the Council of Europe’s member states. For more information see the website: www.coe.int/
en/web/congress/home.34
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesdifferent audiences. Timely and accurately  indicates that information should 
allow relevant stakeholders the necessary time to analyse, evaluate and 
engage into collaboration. The information should be up-to-date, accurate, 
and complete (Bremers and Deleu, 2016: 11).
T able 3. Open government definitions
Sources Definition Components/activities 
for implementation
Congress of Local and 
Regional Authorities  
of the Council of Europe
Report CG35(2018)14final 
‘Transparency and open 
government’ (Galster, 2018)
Strategy on innovation  
and good governance  
at local level (Council of 
Europe, 2007: 2–3)Open government is an 
umbrella term for a wide range 
of practices that further three 
key principles. These practices 
include open data initiatives, 
access to information laws, 
political rights, whistleblower 
protections, and public 
consultation and engagement 
processes, among many others.
Open governance/open 
state: these concepts extend 
open government to include 
initiatives that target other 
institutions (e.g. business, 
parliament, legal systems, etc.). Transparency: 
access to information 
• open data 
• records management 
Participation: 
• civic space 
• civic engagement 
• whistleblower protection 
Accountability: 
• audits 
• codes of ethics
• scrutiny
EU
Towards faster 
implementation and uptake 
of open government.  
Final report. (Bremers and 
Deleu, 2016)Open government refers to 
a process whereby public 
administrations break down 
existing silos, opening up 
and sharing assets (making 
data, services, and decisions 
open), enabling collaboration 
on public service design 
and delivery, and increasing 
participative forms of policy-
making.Open engagement
Open services
Open assets35Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
Sources Definition Components/activities 
for implementation
OECD
Open government: The global 
context and the way forward 
(OECD, 2016)
Recommendation  
of the Council on Open 
Government (OECD, 2017)
Modernising government: 
The way forward  
(OECD, 2005) A government is open when 
it follows the principles of 
transparency, accountability, 
and participation.
Open government is a culture 
of governance that promotes 
the principles of transparency, 
integrity, accountability, and 
stakeholder participation in 
support of democracy and 
inclusive growth.
Definition from 2005: 
open government implies 
transparency of government 
actions, accessibility of 
government services 
and information, and 
responsiveness of government 
to new ideas, demands, and 
needs.Stakeholder participation: 
all the ways in which 
stakeholders can be involved in 
the policy cycle and in service 
design and delivery, including:
• information,
• consultation,
• engagement.
OGP
Open Government 
Declaration (OGP , 2011)
What’s in the OGP 
subnational action plans? 
(OGP , 2017)Open government involves: 
• increasing the availability 
of information about 
governmental activities;
• supporting civic 
participation;
• implementing the highest 
standards of professional 
integrity in public 
administration;
• increasing access to new 
technologies for openness 
and accountability.OGP subnational action 
plans seek to implement 
the core principles in four 
complementary fields:
• civic participation,
• public service delivery,
• marginalized 
communities,
• technology and 
innovation.36
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesSources Definition Components/activities 
for implementation
USA 
Transparency and Open 
Government, 74 Fed.  
Reg. 4685  
(White House, 2009)
Open Government Directive, 
White House  
(Orszag, 2009) Open government is defined 
as a system of transparency 
(information disclosure, 
soliciting public feedback), 
public participation 
(increased opportunities 
to participate in policy-
making), and collaboration 
(the use of innovative tools, 
methods, and systems to 
facilitate cooperation among 
government departments, and 
with non-profit organizations, 
businesses, and individuals in 
the private sector).Transparency
Participation 
Collaboration
World Bank
Open government. Brief 
(World Bank, 2015)
Open government impact 
and outcomes: Mapping the 
landscape of ongoing research 
(World Bank, 2016)Open government means 
increased transparency, 
citizen participation, and 
collaboration between 
government and citizens. 
Citizen-centric governance, 
with openness as a central 
pillar, improves the use of 
public resources, facilitates 
inclusive decision-making 
processes, and increases trust 
between governments and 
citizens. Governments that are 
more open are better positioned 
to act effectively and efficiently, 
to foster private sector growth, 
and to respond to the true 
needs of all citizens.Transparency
Citizen engagement 
and participation
Responsiveness
Source: Authors.37Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
Box 1.  Legislative framework for transparency in education in Australia
Since the publication of the Australian Commonwealth Freedom of Information Act in 1982, 
the Australian public has increasingly come to expect transparency of official information. 
Further legislation, the Education Act 2013, and the national Education Regulation 2013 
specify the information that should be provided about each school. This information is 
collected by the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA), which 
was established by the ACARA Act 2008, and includes school profiles and locations, results of 
the National Assessment Program, school finances, school attendance data across all 
jurisdictions, and reports on progress of the school system towards Australia’s educational 
goals. ACARA also manages the ‘My School’ online portal where school profiles, assessment 
results, and school finances are published in an easy-to-understand format, offering an 
opportunity for parents to track school performance and compare schools. 
Source: Rabinowitz (2018: 16).
T ransparency is usually defined in terms of the functions that it fulfils. 
Analysis of the concept of transparency in the documents and literature on 
open government reveals that it is crucial to identify the purposes and 
stakeholders for which information has to be disclosed (see Bauhr and Grimes, 
2017; Harrison et al., 2012; Linders and Wilson, 2011). It is possible to identify 
three ways in which transparency is useful in the context of open government: 
supporting accountability, enabling citizen engagement (deliberation), and 
fostering social and economic development (public re-use). 
Functions of transparency
Supporting accountability
The first and most widespread way in which transparency can prove useful is to 
hold decision-makers accountable. This links closely to the idea of transparency 
as an anti-corruption measure. According to Linders and Wilson, 
[d]eliberate publication of government information in venues and formats 
that invite review help foster trust and accountability, create a more informed 
citizenry, and reduce scope for corruption and misinformation (2011: 267). 38
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesWhile Linders and Wilson support the idea that transparency is a 
positive indicator of accountability (2011: 267), Bauhr and Grimes (2014, 
2017) show that transparency refers only to certain components of 
accountability. Accountability requires three components: first, an agent 
provides – routinely or on demand – an account to principals regarding 
activities related to a specific domain; second, the agent justifies or explains 
decisions; and third, the principal has the authority and the means to sanction 
the agent effectively (Bauhr and Grimes, 2017: 434; Lindberg, 2013: 209). 
T ransparency is relevant only to the first two components, while the third 
requires mechanisms of answerability or sanctioning.
Deliberation
Another useful function of transparency is deliberation. According to 
Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg,
[t]he underlying assumption in a deliberative process is that if we acquire 
an informed understanding, we, as a collective, will be able to take an 
informed rational decision by weighing pros and cons and by predicting 
the consequences of different actions. ... Deliberation in the open government 
setting thus means forms of collective decisions and information production to 
enable collaboration and innovation (2015: 545).
Deliberation in this sense does not imply that transparency necessarily 
leads to citizen participation; instead it means that citizen participation is 
impossible without the availability of information at the input stage of the 
political process (Bauhr and Grimes, 2017: 434). In order to participate 
extensively and meaningfully in the decision-making process, the public 
needs to understand the workings of their government (see Heller, 2015). 
The central function of transparency here is to provide citizens with all the 
information (e.g. open law-making and policy-making, open contracting, 
open budgets, etc.) necessary to enable their participation.
Public re-use
Finally, transparency for public re-use is grounded in the idea that information 
maintained by the government is a national asset with social and economic 39Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
value and should be made publicly accessible to the maximum extent possible 
(O’Reilly, 2011: 14). According to Linders and Wilson, 
[p]ublic reuse of government data is anticipated to provide economic and 
social value to spur growth, promote a knowledge economy, and help the 
public help itself. Such efforts are also seen as a potential cost-saver by 
enabling the public to develop alternative service delivery channels based 
on government data but developed, delivered, and financed by 
nongovernmental actors (2011: 267).
The public re-use function reflects a shift of focus from exclusively 
democratic values to economic and social values that transparency can foster. 
From this perspective, citizens are perceived as partners rather than customers 
in the delivery of public services (Linders, 2012: 446). This is what Linders 
defines as ‘citizen coproduction’ (2012).
Bauhr and Grimes highlight predictability as an important function of 
transparency (2017: 434). Predictability is a necessary precondition to lower 
risks in market transactions (Bauhr and Grimes, 2017; Stiglitz, 2002). The 
information regarding rules and regulations, as well as the implications of 
failing to comply with rules and regulations, fulfil the function of predictability. 
However, Linders and Wilson point out the risk of unequal access to relevant 
data for different market participants. In particular, if transparency is provided 
by means of ICT , it excludes ‘those on the wrong side of the digital divide’ , 
which can lead to unintended favouritism (Linders and Wilson, 2011: 267). 
As with accountability and deliberation, the mechanisms of answerability, 
impartial control, and sanctioning must be in place for transparency to fulfil 
its function of public re-use. 
Mechanisms of transparency
In practice, implementation of the transparency principle employs four 
mechanisms: open data, access to information, disclosure, and records 
management.
The concept of open data is defined by Baena Olabe et al. as ‘initiatives 
which facilitate the free and proactive release of large volumes of information 
held in government databases in formats and under conditions that permit 40
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesre-use’ (Baena Olabe et al., 2013: para. 53). The International Open Data 
Charter (2015) outlines six principles for how to publish data: open by 
default, timely and comprehensive, accessible and useable, comparable and 
interoperable, for improved governance and citizen engagement, and for 
inclusive development and innovation. The concept of open data is relevant 
to all three functions of transparency. It is also a precondition for further 
dimensions of open government, such as open contracting, open budgeting, 
and social audits, as well as open policy-making (see Chapter  3.1). For 
example, open data on government procurement was used to foster supplier 
competition and better quality of meals through open contracting under the 
Bogotá School Feeding Programme (see Chapter 7.4 for more details).
Access to information is a legal right for citizens. Information 
requested from governments must be provided unless it falls under a specific
Box 2.  Indonesia: Moving to open school data on the government and civil 
society side
In 2015, a government-led school report card (SRC) system, ‘Sekolah Kita’ (‘My School’), was 
launched online by the Ministry of Education and Culture of Indonesia. The website contains 
data of all private and public schools from kindergartens to upper secondary school levels, 
covering school accreditation and teacher certification, information on student and teacher 
numbers, lists of academic and non-academic achievements, and conditions of classrooms 
and other facilities. The data are used by parents and other stakeholders to choose schools 
based on their reputation, although complaint forms available on the website are not well 
used. According to the requirements of the Indonesian education management information 
system and school funding regulations, the data are updated at least once per semester. Failure 
by individual schools to update their data may result in funding being withheld. 
In parallel to this platform, an initiative by a CSO, Transparency International Indonesia, 
has been in place since 2014. This platform contains fewer data and is updated less regularly 
but functions as a powerful feedback instrument for stakeholders, both online and offline.
Both students and parents appreciate the online platforms because they feel more confident 
in giving feedback to school administrations online than in person.
Source: Felicia (2018).41Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
exemption in law (Galster, 2018: 11). The right of access to information is 
often enacted by freedom of information legislation. Access to information 
is relevant to all three functions of transparency.
Disclosure is the act of routinely publishing certain information, 
sometimes required by law. Disclosure can support anti-corruption measures 
by requiring the routine publication of assets and declarations of conflicts 
of interest, among others (OECD, 2011). Disclosure is of primary importance 
to ensuring accountability. 
Records management  refers to the efficient and systematic control of 
the creation, use, and maintenance of all information, including records, to 
properly support an organization (OGP , n.d.b). Good records management 
ensures that information is accessible, authentic, comprehensive, and reliable, 
and therefore underpins both access to information and open data (Galster, 
2018: 11).
Risks and challenges
The trend towards increasing transparency, especially by means of ICT s, is 
associated in the literature with a number of risks. 
Wrong focus: Despite the rhetoric about transparency, accountability, 
participation, and collaboration, for all practical purposes open government 
focuses on transparency, while ignoring fundamental democratic issues 
regarding participation and collaboration (Carothers and Brechenmacher, 
2014; Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg, 2015). For example, open 
government in relation to e-government has been criticized for its focus on 
improving government services, and for not exploring the transformation 
of government as a whole towards a more participatory form of democracy 
(Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg, 2015). Another critique highlights the 
strong focus on technological solutions, rather than adapting organizational 
practices, policy, and culture (Zhang, Puron-Cid, and Gil-Garcia, 2015). 
T ransparency without accountability in a context of endemic corruption can 
be counterproductive; it leads to frustration and may demobilize civic 42
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesactivism (Bauhr and Grimes, 2014; Bauhr, Grimes, and Harring, 2010; 
Galster, 2018; Rumbul, Parsons, and Bramley, 2018).
Security issues: The lack of balance between public access, national 
security, and privacy has also been critiqued (Hansson, Belkacem, and 
Ekenberg, 2015:  547; Linders and Wilson, 2011: 265). T oo much 
transparency can undermine security (Linders and Wilson, 2011: 266); for 
example, Khan (2018) refers to the risks of disclosing the location of schools 
in Pakistan.
Disadvantaging marginalized groups in society: T ransparency by 
means of ICT s can deepen the gap between the rich and the poor, by 
increasing the marginalization of those who have no access to ICT s or lack 
the know-how to use them (Linders and Wilson, 2011: 265). 
Interpretation challenge: Some authors highlight the challenge of 
data interpretation (Fung, 2013). According to Hansson et al., ‘it is not 
enough to release data. Without the right tools and understanding to interpret 
it, data are not very useful’ (Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg, 2015: 547).
2.3 Citizen participation and collaboration
Public engagement means broadly that ‘the public can influence the workings 
of their government by engaging in governmental policy processes and 
service delivery programs’ (Heller, 2015). Some OG definitions, including 
those from the US Government (Orszag, 2009; White House, 2009) and 
the European Commission (Bremers and Deleu, 2016), refer to two terms 
– (citizen) participation and collaboration – as separate principles of open 
government. Linders and Wilson elaborate the difference between the two 
as follows:
Collaboration differs from participation in two regards. First, collaboration 
requires significant (if not equal) power sharing (partnering), whereas with 
participation opportunities the government maintains full decision-making 
powers. Second, collaboration, as defined in the OGD [Open Government 
Directive], has an implicit link to organized entities (corporations, 
nonprofits, etc.) rather than individuals. Improved collaboration can occur 43Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
both externally with nongovernmental entities and internally within the 
government (2011: 268).
The OECD combines both terms and refers to ‘stakeholder participation’ 
as ‘all the ways in which stakeholders can be involved in the policy cycle and 
in-service design and delivery’ , including information, consultation, and 
engagement (OECD, 2017: 2).
At the heart of public engagement in the context of open government 
lies the concept of ‘citizen coproduction’ ( Johnston, 2010; Johnston and 
Hansen, 2011; Linders, 2012). This concept indicates a change of paradigm 
in government–citizen relations: citizen coproduction means that 
government treats the public not as customers, but as partners. In other 
words, the role of the citizens expands from passive consumption of public 
services ‘to one of active involvement to jointly tackle social problems’ 
(Linders, 2012: 446). Such a change of paradigm became possible owing to 
the use of ICT s over the past two decades. According to Linders, 
[w]hereas coproduction in the past was constrained by the limited ability 
of government to effectively coordinate citizen actions and the difficulty of 
ordinary citizens to self-organize, the advent of the Internet’s unique many-
to-many interactivity and of ubiquitous communications promises to enable 
coproduction on an unprecedented scale (2012: 446).
Functions of public engagement
Citizen participation in its various forms fulfils different functions. Each 
function reflects a different level of government–citizen relations, which 
enables differentiation between ‘empty ritual participation’ and ‘real power 
to affect the outcome of the process’ (Arnstein, 1969:  216). Based on 
the original ‘ladder of citizen participation’ developed by Arnstein, the 
International Association for Public Participation today identifies five levels 
of participation (IAP2, n.d.):
1. Inform: to provide the public with balanced and objective information 
to assist them in understanding the problem, alternatives, opportunities, 
and/or solutions;44
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiatives2. Consult: to obtain public feedback on analysis, alternatives, and/or 
decisions;
3. Involve : to work directly with the public throughout the process to 
ensure that public concerns and aspirations are consistently understood 
and considered;
4. Collaborate: to partner with the public on each aspect of the decisions 
including the development of alternatives and the identification of the 
preferred solution; and
5. Empower: to place final decision-making in the hands of the public.
Critical researchers argue, however, that more participation is not always 
better (Fung, 2006; Harrison et al., 2012). Fung, for instance, argues that 
‘there may indeed be contexts in which public empowerment is highly 
desirable, but there are certainly others in which a consultative role is more 
appropriate for members of the public than full “citizen control”’ (Fung, 
2006:  67). Harrison et  al. point out that the context – especially the 
characteristics of the policy process – and the goals of public engagement 
should form the basis for decisions about the design and implementation of 
functions and mechanisms of participation (2012: 88).
Mechanisms of public engagement
The literature differentiates between several terms that reflect different 
levels of public engagement:
Citizen engagement  entails creating opportunities for citizens to 
actively contribute to government decision-making and agenda-setting 
processes (Linders and Wilson, 2011: 267).
Citizen sourcing involves tapping the talent and inventiveness of the 
public by sharing data and other inputs to enable citizens to construct ideas 
and solutions to public/government problems (Linders and Wilson, 
2011: 268).
Collaborative service delivery means enabling citizens and partner 
organizations to participate in the design and delivery of services to improve 45Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
their quality and responsiveness by opening government to contributions 
from the community (Linders and Wilson, 2011: 268).
Intra-governmental partnering requires collaboratively constructing 
government-wide solutions, improving intra-agency and inter-agency 
collaboration, promoting knowledge sharing, and disseminating best 
practices to improve government efficiency and effectiveness (Linders and 
Wilson, 2011: 268).
Methods
Since the core idea of public engagement is to increase the influence 
of citizens in the policy-making process, it is useful to capture different 
methods of public engagement in line with each phase of the policy cycle. 
The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe 
provides such an overview (T able 4).
T able 4.  Methods of citizen participation at different stages of the 
policy cycle
Policy stage Examples of methods*
Agenda setting Citizens’ initiatives
Deliberative forums
Participatory budgetingPetition
Visioning
Policy formation Citizen panels
Crowdsourcing
Deliberative forumsFocus groups
Opinion polling
Decision-making Citizens’ assemblies
Citizens’ juries
Consensus conferencesPublic consultation
Referenda
Implementation Co-commissioning 
Co-productionService co-design
User panels
Monitoring  
and evaluationCitizen report cards
Community score cardsComplaint mechanisms
Surveys
Source: Galster (2018: 18). 
Note : * These and further methods are described on the website of the NGO Involve under ‘Methods’ , 
available at: www.involve.org.uk/resources/methods .46
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesRisks and challenges
The literature pays attention to several challenges associated with citizen 
participation and collaboration. 
Limitations on the scope of deliberative decision and action: Some 
nominal participation may legitimize questionable actions of powerholders 
without fulfilling the proper, democratic functions of participation (Arnstein, 
1969; Fung, 2006). Furthermore, Fung and Wright (2003: 33) argue that 
‘powerful participants may engage in “forum-shopping” strategies in which 
they utilize deliberative institutions only when it suits them’ . As a result, the 
institution of public engagement can be misused for rent-seeking by well-
informed or interested parties.
Citizens’ apathy and lack of sustainable engagement: Hansson, 
Belkacem, and Ekenberg state that ‘means to participate do not equal 
motivation’ (2015: 547). According to Fung and Wright (2003), ‘empowered 
participation may demand unrealistically high levels of popular commitment, 
especially in contemporary climates of civic and political disengagement. 
Finally, these experiments may enjoy initial successes but may be difficult to 
sustain over the long term’ .
Box 3.  Citizen sourcing of issues in education in Medellín, Colombia
Sapiencia, the funding body of the Higher Education Agency of Medellín, has used the city’s 
co-creation platform ‘MiMedellín Co-creación Ciudadana’ to engage prospective students in 
setting policy priorities for higher education funding. The Agency has identified several problems 
in need of a solution and asked visitors to the platform to rank them in order of urgency. The 
MiMedellín platform forms part of the city’s strategy to foster scientific and technological 
innovation, which was introduced in 2009 by the Mayor’s office in cooperation with public 
enterprises and coordinated by the Ruta N ‘Medellín Centre of Business and Innovation’.
Source: Tercanli and Meerman, 2017.
Heterogenous interests of the public: The ‘public’ is not homogeneous, 
but rather a diversified group with different interests, preferences, and 
abilities. This heterogeneity implies the risk that separate groups of 47Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
participants may not aggregate their preferences into a coherent whole 
(Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg, 2015; Harrison et al., 2012).
Imbalances in the use of civic technologies: Rumbul provides 
evidence that older, affluent, white men create a dominant group that uses 
civic technologies (Rumbul, 2015). Reliance on the responses of a small 
segment of engaged population can distort the government’s perception of 
public needs and public attitudes as well as decrease legitimacy (Rumbul, 
2015; Williamson and Eisen, 2016).
Disproportion and unfounded expectations in partnerships 
between public authorities and citizens (Linders and Wilson, 
2011: 266 ff.): Public–private partnerships frequently suffer from unclear 
divisions of labour and poorly defined roles and responsibilities. Diffusion 
of responsibility and conflicting demands often place stress on the partnership 
and constrain effectiveness. Furthermore, government’s vast size and 
burdensome regulations can make it an intimidating partner. At the same 
time, citizens as volunteering partners may lack the capacity for planning 
and the resources for sustainable engagement.
2.4 Accountability and responsiveness
Accountability broadly means that the public can hold government to 
account for its decisions and actions (i.e.  its policy and service delivery 
performance) (Galster, 2018; Heller, 2015). Mendel et al. state that:
Public power thus needs to be organised in a way which ensures that the 
people can demand answers from and, if needed, indicate displeasure with 
or even sanction the government (2014: 2).
Lindberg notes that ‘accountability is closely associated with authority 
though not necessarily political authority’ (Lindberg, 2013: 208). In other 
words, accountability must be backed up by power to demand an accounting. 
This is where the difference between accountability and integrity is crucial: 
while accountability functions in line with the principle that ‘the more strictly 
we are watched, the better we behave’ (Bentham quoted in Lindberg, 
2013: 208), integrity means doing the right thing when no one is watching. 48
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesThe availability of control is thus crucial to providing accountability, while 
integrity is rather an intrinsic norm.
The responsibilities of a government with regard to accountability can 
be analytically divided into two dimensions: enforcement/sanctioning and 
answerability (Bauhr and Grimes, 2017; Mendel et al., 2014). Enforcement 
implies the presence of sanctions and mechanisms by which the obtained 
information can become an effective means to ensure responsibility on the 
part of the state for its decisions and actions. There are several ways to enforce 
accountability,5 including horizontal (intra-governmental) and vertical 
(electoral) (Bauhr and Grimes, 2017; Mendel et al., 2014). The horizontal 
approach encompasses ‘a web of institutional relationships’ that enforce 
accountability (Mendel et al., 2014: 3). These institutions are often referred 
to as checks and balances in democracies. For instance, the principle of rule 
of law and an independent judiciary or parliamentary oversight of the 
executive are mechanisms of horizontal accountability. Independent 
institutions, such as anti-corruption commissions, human rights commissions, 
ombudsmen, information commissions, and judicial commissions, are also 
examples of horizontal accountability (Mendel et al., 2014: 4). Vertical or 
electoral accountability can be ensured through direct and indirect 
mechanisms. Elections are the direct means whereby citizens enforce their 
preferences for government (political accountability). Public pressure through 
media and monitoring of the government through civil society networks are 
indirect forms of vertical (reputational ) accountability.
Another dimension of accountability is answerability – ‘the obligation 
of state actors to provide information and an explanation to the public about 
their activities’ (Mendel et al., 2014: 1). Within this dimension, accountability 
closely overlaps with transparency, although transparency in terms of open 
data goes beyond the function of answerability (see Chapter  2.2 on the 
functions of transparency). 
While answerability provides the link between accountability and 
transparency, responsiveness provides the link between accountability and 
5.  For an overview of other forms of accountability, see Lindberg, 2013.49Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
Box 4.  Horizontal and vertical accountability in education
In education, accountability reflects social and cultural prerequisites and is often context 
dependent (see Chapters 6.2 and 8.1 for a theoretical discussion and examples, respectively). 
However, some general trends are evident.
Manifestations of horizontal accountability include legal/regulatory and performance-based 
approaches. With the legal/regulatory approach, disciplinary action may follow if independent 
auditing bodies uncover violations of educational regulations upon inspection of education 
providers (from schools to ministries). With the performance-based approach, information 
on educational processes, outputs, and outcomes is used to provide sanctions or rewards, 
usually within the confines of the responsible ministry.
Approaches to vertical accountability range from the electoral through to the market-based 
and professional to the social. Electoral approaches provide the option for citizens to punish 
political actors with withdrawal from office in the event of failures in educational systems. 
Market-based accountability mostly targets schools: given the choice, parents may withdraw 
their children from underperforming schools once school data become available. Professional 
accountability mostly targets teachers and school principals and is based on peer pressure. 
Finally, social accountability operates through the pressure of organized citizen groups and 
CSOs and targets education providers (from ministries to schools).
Source: UNESCO (2017a: 7).
Box 5.  Codes of conduct in secondary and higher education
Codes of ethical conduct for teaching and administrative staff, as well as for students at 
universities, are being developed in an increasing number of countries. Although the content 
of these codes varies greatly between countries and across levels of education, they usually 
cover areas such as admission, examination, management of teaching staff and student 
relations, evaluation and certification, and management of financial resources. Codes may 
be introduced by responsible education authorities (e.g. ministries of education in Bangladesh, 
India, and Nepal), independent bodies, such as in Hong Kong, by professional associations 
of teachers as in the province of Ontario in Canada, or by individual education institutions 
as in the case of Washington and Lee University (Virginia, USA).
Codes of conduct should include clear guidelines and expectations, as well as procedures to 
be followed and sanctions to be taken in cases of violations. In developing and adopting a 
code of ethics, it is crucial to involve all relevant stakeholders to ensure ownership and thus 
increase the chances of subsequent compliance.
Source: van Nuland and Poisson (2009); Poisson (2009).50
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativescitizen participation. Responsiveness – the positive reaction of agents to the 
wishes and interests of the principals – is often considered as an integral part 
of vertical accountability (Lindberg, 2013: 216). Research shows that 
responsiveness increases the probability of further citizen participation 
(Sjoberg, Mellon, and Peixoto, 2015), while lack of responsiveness decreases 
trust and confidence of citizens in participation mechanisms (Rumbul and 
Shaw, 2017). The OECD (2005) identifies government responsiveness as a 
core characteristic of open government, next to transparency and accessibility. 
Box 6.  Summary: Conceptualizing open government principles
Transparency refers to relevant, accessible, timely, and accurate data that government 
makes available to the public in order to assess government action (accountability), exercise 
a voice in decision-making (deliberation), and unlock social and economic value (public 
re-use).
Mechanisms of transparency:
Open data: large volumes of information stored in databases in formats for electronic re-use.
Access to information: the right of citizens to request information.
Disclosure: the routine publication of assets and declarations of conflict of interest.
Records management: mechanism to ensure data are accessible, authentic, comprehensive, 
and reliable.
Public engagement: informing, consulting, involving, collaborating, and empowering 
the public, while the utility of different levels depends on the specifics of the policy process.
Mechanisms of public engagement:
Participation
Citizen engagement: citizens contribute to government decision-making 
processes.
Citizen sourcing: government taps public ideas and talents to develop 
concepts and solutions.51Conceptualizing open government: Definitions, mechanisms, (dys-)functionalities 
Collaboration
Collaborative service delivery: partner organizations collaborate in the 
design and delivery of services to improve their quality. 
Intra-governmental partnering: collaborative construction of 
government-wide solutions, improving intra-agency and inter-agency 
collaboration, and promoting knowledge sharing.
Accountability:
Answerability
The obligation of the state to provide 
information and an explanation to the 
public about its activities; overlaps with 
transparency.Enforcement
The existence of sanctions and 
mechanisms to ensure the responsibility 
of the state for its decisions and actions; 
overlaps with public engagement.
Mechanisms of accountability: (social) audits, codes of conduct and codes of ethics, 
scrutiny.
Source: Authors.
World Bank analysts include responsiveness as the third principle of open 
government, after transparency and participation and collaboration. According 
to the World Bank (2016: 5), ‘responsiveness includes government-led reforms 
or institutions that have the force of law and/or the potential to impose 
consequences for government entities and officials who fail to comply’ .Responsiveness 
Positive reaction on the part of agents to 
the wishes and interests of the principals.Horizontal (intra-governmental)
An institutionalized system of checks 
and balances; the principle of rule 
of law; independent institutions (e.g. 
ombudsmen).Vertical (electoral)
Elections as a direct mechanism;
public pressure through media and 
monitoring as an indirect mechanism.52
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesMechanisms of accountability
The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe 
elaborates four mechanisms of accountability as foundational elements of 
open government:
Audit, both internal and external, is critical to ensuring that public money 
is appropriately collected, managed and spent by local government.
Social audits are conducted by civil society in a locality through accessing 
information from government, engaging citizens and reviewing the situation 
on the ground. Social audits are most effective when they are supported by 
and feed into official audit institutions.
Codes of ethics outline what is expected of public servants and provide an 
important basis for challenging malpractice and corruption in government. 
Codes of ethics need to be underpinned by clear procedures for complaints, 
review and sanctions.
Scrutiny of the executive functions of local government by elected 
representatives is an important cornerstone of democratic governance. It 
helps to ensure that decision makers are responsive and accountable to 
residents for their decisions; scrutiny by elected representatives is further 
supplemented by scrutiny by residents, civil society and the media. As with 
auditing, this can take place through local government structures (e.g. town 
hall meetings, evidence sessions, shadow citizens’ committees), or 
independently of it (Galster, 2018: 13).
In conclusion, the fundamental principles of open government 
(i.e.  transparency, public engagement, and accountability), are closely 
interwoven and function only if all three are present. A short summary of 
the functions, mechanisms, and risks associated with open government is 
provided in Box 6.53
Chapter 3
Dimensions and objectives  
of open government
3.1 Dimensions of open government
While the literature identifies transparency, citizen participation and 
collaboration, and accountability and responsiveness as closely interwoven 
principles of open government, it is the dimensions of open government 
that enable the application of these principles to concrete initiatives. 
The European Commission’s open governance framework 
The European Commission (Bremers and Deleu, 2016) defines three core 
aspects of open government: open engagement, open services, and open 
assets (see Figure  1 ). The collective aim of these core aspects is to open 
up policy-making, public services, and government assets. Each aspect is 
more or less related to the respective principals – the groups targeted by 
each initiative for engagement (e.g.  citizens and users/civil society and 
business/private sector/social partners).
The core aspects are defined as follows:
Open engagement  entails opening up the processes for public policy 
making to the whole of society, including civil society, businesses, labor 
unions, individual citizens. Open processes for policy making entail better 
informing society of ongoing policy initiatives, conducting public 
consultations of policy initiatives, and even allowing the whole of society 
to actively participate and propose ideas for future public policy.
Open services  refers to digital public services that can be re-used by other 
public administrations or eventually by third parties in order to provide 
value-added services via a mechanism of service composition. Open services 
necessitate a proper design of digital public services. The design principles 54
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesof service-oriented architecture (SOA)6 can prove useful: modular, 
decomposed services, interoperability through an application programming 
interface (API), and loose coupling.
Open assets can be defined as government data, software, specifications 
and frameworks that are open so that anyone can freely access, use, modify, 
and redistribute its content with no or limited restrictions such as 
commercial-use or financial charges (Bremers and Deleu, 2016: 11).
Figure 1.  Open governance framework
Users
CitizensCivil society
Businesses
Private 
sectorSocial 
partners
Open assets
Transparency Collaboration
Open 
government
ParticipationOpen 
engagementOpen services
Source: Bremers and Deleu (2016: 10).
6. SOA is a style of software design. SOA enables developers to make distinct software units accessible over a network 
to other users, allowing them to combine and re-use the production of applications. These services and their 
corresponding consumers communicate with each other by passing data in a well-defined, shared format, or by 
coordinating an activity between two or more services. This principle is also known as ‘loose coupling’. For more 
information on SOA, see Bell 2008, 2010., as well as https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service-oriented_architecture.55Dimensions and objectives of open government 
Open government principles according to government functions
Another approach to identifying the main dimensions of open government 
is to structure them in line with the four functions of government: 
budgeting, contracting, policy-making, and service delivery. Using this 
approach, the dimensions of open government are open budgets, open 
contracting, open policies, and open innovation and social audits. Each 
dimension is summarized in T able 5 below, adapted from the Congress of 
Local and Regional Authorities.
Glossary
Open budgeting is a ‘budget accountability system [consisting of three 
components]: public availability of budget information; opportunities for 
the public to participate in the budget process; and the role and effectiveness 
of formal oversight institutions, including the legislature and the national 
audit office’ (IBP , 2017). Hence, this category includes social audits of 
the budget and participatory budgeting. This understanding is also in line 
with the OGP guidance on budgets, where social audits and participatory 
budgeting are seen as advanced forms of open government relating to the 
budget (OGP , 2014: 53–54). 
Open contracting  is a combination of information  related to 
procurement (developing a framework for a transparent and equitable 
contracting process, recognizing the right of the public to access public 
contracting information, and routinely disclosing core classes of documents 
and data about public contracting) and participation of the public at different 
stages of the procurement process (creating mechanisms for participation 
at all stages of contracting, and building and sustaining the capacity of 
stakeholders to disclose, understand, monitor, and act upon contracting 
information) (OCP/WBI, 2013: 3). According to the OGP , open contracting
covers the entire process, including formation, award, execution, 
performance and completion of public contracts, and the full range of 
contract types, from basic procurement to joint ventures, licenses and 
production sharing agreements. Open contracting practices can be 
implemented at all levels of government and can apply to all public 
contracting, including contracts funded by combinations of public, private 
and donor sources (OGP , 2014: 271).56
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesT able 5. Open government dimensions by government function and 
open government principles
Government function:
OG dimensionOG principles
Transparency Participation  
and collaborationAccountability 
and responsiveness
Budgeting:  
open budgetingOpen budgets: the 
public have access to 
information on how 
government collects 
and spends public 
funds.Participatory 
budgeting: the 
public are involved 
in influencing or 
deciding how a public 
budget is spent.Social audits of 
the budget: the public 
can hold decision-
makers accountable 
for the allocation and 
spending of public 
money.
Contracting:  
open contractingThe public have access 
to information on the 
full contracting cycle, 
including planning, 
tender, awarding 
of contracts, and 
implementation.The public are involved 
in planning, awarding, 
and/or evaluating the 
implementation of 
government contracts.The public can hold 
decision-makers 
accountable for how 
goods and services are 
commissioned and 
procured.
Policy-making: 
open policy-makingThe public have access 
to information on how 
policy is made and by 
whom.The public are involved 
in informing, making, 
implementing, and 
evaluating policies.The public can hold 
decision-makers 
accountable for how 
they make policies and 
what they achieve.
Service delivery:  
open innovation  
and social auditsThe public have access 
to information on their 
rights and entitlements 
and on the governance, 
funding, and 
performance of public 
services.The public are 
involved in designing, 
commissioning, 
delivering, and 
evaluating public 
services.The public can hold 
decision-makers 
accountable for the 
quality and accessibility 
of public services.
Source: Adapted from Galster (2018: 14).57Dimensions and objectives of open government 
Open policy(-making) describes an approach whereby public officials 
look for ways to engage citizens at each step of a policy process. It is included 
in the OGP guide as an advanced step of citizen engagement: 
Among other things, it requires a much more open approach to policy 
making, whereby: a shared understanding of the issue in question is 
developed between relevant stakeholders (including citizens); possible 
policy solutions are developed with relevant stakeholders (including 
citizens), and collaborative solutions are sought; policy decisions are 
informed by the views and expertise of a broad range of stakeholders 
(including citizens), and the reasoning and evidence base for a decision is 
open to all; the implementation of a policy decision is informed by, and 
conducted in partnership with, relevant stakeholders (including citizens); 
the impact of a policy decision [is] properly evaluated, including by those 
it affects (OGP , 2014: 67).
Open innovation is a blurred category that refers to the way of thinking 
and internal culture of public administrations, emphasizing not only citizen 
participation but also science and business. It may be understood as a way 
to envision possibilities for public service in terms of participation culture, 
technology, goals, embracing scientific findings, and so on. 
Social audits  
allow citizens receiving a specific service to examine and cross-check the 
information the service provider makes available against information 
collected from users of the service. This form of monitoring can cover all 
aspects of the service delivery process, such as funds allocated, materials 
procured, and people enrolled. The audit results are typically shared with 
all interested and concerned stakeholders through public gatherings, which 
are generally attended by users of the services as well as public officials 
involved in management of the service delivery unit. … The core of the 
social audit approach is to involve the entire affected group or community 
in the process. In most cases, the members carrying out the social audits 
are volunteers who are directly affected by the program, and these volunteers 
are generally trained in the social audit process by a civil society organization 
(OGP , 2014: 308). 58
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesExamples of types of social audit include Community Score Cards and 
Citizen Report Cards (OGP , 2014: 208), both of which function as tools to 
combat petty and administrative corruption.
Box 7.  Variety of social audits in education: Report cards and social 
audits of budgets
In 2000, Transparency International Bangladesh conducted a report card survey across a 
representative sample of primary schools and their respective districts. The survey targeted both 
the immediate providers and recipients of education services, including government primary 
education offices and primary school teachers, as well as students and their guardians. Through 
the use of questionnaires, individual interviews, and focus groups, this participatory diagnostic 
tool was able to systematically identify mismanagement and corruption in the primary education 
sector. The findings of the report card survey were then used to bring corruption issues to the 
attention of the government, resulting in appropriate anti-corruption measures.
In India, a local grass-roots group in Rajasthan began to cross-check reported information 
with government records in the 1990s, thereby initiating social audits of budgets. In 2011, 
social audits became a mandatory part of the governmental programme Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA), which is working to achieve Education for All targets. Facilitated by CSOs, 
social audits involve communities, local governments (panchayat), and school management 
committees in scrutinizing reported SSA expenditures and cross-checking them with actual 
expenditures in the localities. Findings from this process are reported at public hearings 
where public officials have to respond. Despite delays in launching social audits owing to the 
lack of capacity building for social audit participants, in 2015 a number of effective social 
audits of schools were conducted by CSOs in partnership with the National Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) and the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
In Bangladesh and India, it soon became apparent that social audits necessitate considerable 
investment in infrastructure and the capacities of participants, and require the endorsement 
of a government to be effective.
Source: For Bangladesh, see Karim (2004); for India, see Kapur, Sahgal, and Choudhary (2014).
3.2 Objectives of open government
The analysis of core aspects of open government shows that their 
operationalization – how and by which mechanisms they are implemented – 
depends closely on the end goal of the OG initiative in question. Since open 
government appears to be a fuzzy concept – an umbrella term that unites 59Dimensions and objectives of open government 
different meanings and indicates a governance process rather than an aspect 
of the status quo – defining the objective helps to achieve operationalization 
of these core aspects. 
Documented objectives
The documented overview on open government highlights four sets of 
objectives (see also Annex 1): 
Improving the quality of democracy: The Congress of Local and 
Regional Authorities indicates that open government can help achieve 12 
principles of good governance adopted by the Council of Europe (Council 
of Europe, n.d.). In this regard, the European Commission refers to ‘more 
transparent functioning of government’ and ‘better policy making via 
enhanced participation’ (Bremers and Deleu, 2016: 19). 
A critical literature review on open government and democracy 
conducted by Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg (2015) indicates three 
ways that open government can contribute positively to the quality of 
democracy: ensuring understanding , providing a deliberative process, and 
securing equal representation in decision-making. However, their research 
shows that, in practice, the dominant OG discourse emphasizes understanding  
but barely touches upon deliberation  and representation. 
Decreasing corruption and building trust: Both the Congress of 
Local and Regional Authorities and the OECD recognize that open 
government is critical to building citizen trust and is a key contributor to 
achieving success in the field of public sector integrity and anti-corruption 
(Galster, 2018; OECD, 2017). The explicit links between open government, 
decreasing corruption, and increasing trust are elaborated in the ‘theory of 
change’ (see Chapter 4).
Improving the quality of governmental services: This objective 
includes the increased effectiveness, efficiency, and efficacy of public services. 
Electronic governance or e-government plays an important role in attaining 
a high quality of governmental services. Additionally, the use of civic capacity 
in the form of citizen expertise and engagement improves the evidence base 
for policy-making and reduces implementation costs for governments. 60
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesCreating social and economic added value for citizens: Most 
institutions that promote open government ideas emphasize that open 
government fosters private sector growth (World Bank, 2015) and 
contributes to all major socio-economic targets (OECD, 2016, 2017). This 
is mainly a result of the predictability function provided by open data and 
the public re-use function of transparency.
Public value
Practical challenges to establishing OG objectives have led to the increasing 
popularity of the term ‘public value’ in the academic literature (e.g. Harrison 
et al., 2012; Luna-Reyes and Chun, 2012; Wirtz and Birkmeyer, 2015; Zhang, 
Puron-Cid, and Gil-Garcia, 2015). In their contributions to this discussion, 
these authors argue that transparency, participation, and collaboration 
should not in themselves constitute the end or objective of administrative 
action. Instead, they are a means to create public value – a term, coined by 
Moore (2000), that reflects the public interest. Part of public value is derived 
from the direct usefulness of the benefits that authorities produce for citizens; 
another part is derived from the fairness and equity of their production and 
distribution, and from meeting citizens’ requirements for properly ordered 
and productive public institutions (Harrison et al., 2012: 90). 
Ultimately, whether a government action creates public value is a 
collective judgement made by citizens. However, there is no single and 
objective perspective on the value of public good: citizens include multiple 
stakeholders with different interests and, as such, there is no homogenous 
‘public’ or ‘interest’ . T o address this heterogeneity, Harrison et al. (2012: 90) 
list seven basic types of public value: economic, political, social, strategic, 
quality of life, ideological, and stewardship.7 Aspects of open government 
such as transparency, participation, and collaboration, as well as efficiency, 
effectiveness, and intrinsic enhancement, are not goals; they represent 
mechanisms – how a government programme is expected to produce one 
or more public values. These are ‘value-generating mechanisms’ (Harrison 
7. Stewardship as a type of public value refers to ‘impacts on the public’s view of government officials as faithful stewards or 
guardians of the value of the government in terms of public trust, integrity, and legitimacy’ (Harrison et al., 2012: 91).61Dimensions and objectives of open government 
et al., 2012: 91). The choice of the appropriate mechanism depends on the 
type of public value to which a particular stakeholder aspires.
Open government results chain
Objectives are central for the assessment of OG projects. The classical 
model in effectiveness research is useful here to better differentiate between 
public value as an objective and as a value-generating mechanism. The 
model foresees three levels of measurement (Ulbert, 2013): output  covers 
immediate effects such as the establishment of structures and rules and the 
specification of goals and tasks; outcome  encompasses more far-reaching 
effects such as compliance (behavioural change) and implementation; 
and impact  represents a contribution to problem-solving. The World Bank 
assessment of open government relies on this model (World Bank, 2016). 
In addition, World Bank analysts differentiate between short- and medium-
term outcomes (Figure 2 ). When applying this model to open government, 
they apply the following definitions: 
Open government outputs include measures of efficacy and the extent to 
which the reform or initiative worked as intended. Outputs are largely within 
the control of the government or civil society organization implementing 
the OG reform or intervention. …
Outcomes  include both short- and medium-term effects of a particular 
reform or intervention …. In the short term, OG outcomes include the 
degree to which outputs actually lead to greater transparency, citizen 
engagement, and government responsiveness …. In the medium term, OG 
outcomes include the degree to which an intervention or reform leads to 
greater governmental accountability and effectiveness. …
In some cases, greater accountability may lead to social, economic, or 
environmental change …. [Such long-term OG] effects (both positive and 
negative) are considered as ‘impact ’ . Assessing the impact of open 
government is far more elusive than measuring outputs or outcomes (World 
Bank, 2016: 5 ff.).
The analysis of different OG objectives reveals two lessons for further 
operationalization of the OG process. First, it is crucial to be clear about who 62
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesare the main subjects of the OG initiative and to identify objectives from the 
stakeholder’s perspective, rather than from that of an undifferentiated public. 
Second, it is crucial to differentiate between the objectives (outcomes and 
impact) that open government has to fulfil in terms of problem-solving and 
value-generating mechanisms, such as e-government, open data, or open 
policy-making.
Figure 2. Open government results chain
OUTPUTS
Did the intervention 
or reform work as 
intended?SHORT-TERM 
OUTCOMES
Did the intervention 
or reform lead to 
greater transparency, 
citizen engagement/
participation, or 
responsiveness?MEDIUM-TERM 
OUTCOMES
Did the intervention 
or reform lead to 
greater governmental 
accountability and 
effectiveness?IMPACT
Did the intervention 
lead to improved 
social, economic, 
or environmental 
conditions?
Law implemented, 
intervention carried 
out successfullyMore information 
publicly available, 
enhanced public 
engagement with 
officialsImproved service 
delivery, reduced 
corruption, discipline 
of public employeesImproved health, 
education, economic 
indicatorsOpen government results chain
Illustrative outputs, outcomes, and impacts
Source: World Bank (2016: 7).63
Chapter 4
‘Theory of change’: Why and how does open 
government influence corruption?
The United Nations Convention against Corruption provides the legal 
foundation for transparency and citizen participation in anti-corruption 
efforts (see Chapter II, especially Article 13[1]: 
Each State Party shall take appropriate measures, within its means and in 
accordance with fundamental principles of its domestic law, to promote the 
active participation of individuals and groups outside the public sector, such 
as civil society, non-governmental organizations and community-based 
organizations, in the prevention of and the fight against corruption and to 
raise public awareness regarding the existence, causes and gravity of and 
the threat posed by corruption. This participation should be strengthened 
by such measures as: 
a)  Enhancing the transparency of and promoting the contribution of the 
public to decision-making processes; 
b)  Ensuring that the public has effective access to information; 
c)  Undertaking public information activities that contribute to non-
tolerance of corruption, as well as public education programmes, 
including school and university curricula; 
d)  Respecting, promoting and protecting the freedom to seek, receive, 
publish and disseminate information concerning corruption (United 
Nations, 2003: 15).
Accordingly, fostering transparency and citizen participation have become 
an integral part of national and international anti-corruption programmes. 
A recent review of theoretical and empirical literature examining the 
impact of open government (Williamson and Eisen, 2016) reveals six features 
common to successful OG reforms. Williamson and Eisen summarize these 
features in a series of questions: (i) Have the proponents identified the specific 64
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesprincipals8 (e.g. segments of the public, civil society, media, and other 
stakeholders) that the OG initiative is intended to benefit? (ii)  Is the 
information revealed by the initiative important to the principals? (iii) Is the 
information accessible and has it been publicized among the principals? 
(iv) Can the principals respond meaningfully as individuals? (v) Are 
governmental agents supportive of the reform effort? (vi) Can the principals 
coordinate among themselves to change the incentives of their governmental 
agents? In successful OG projects, the answer to the first three question was 
yes, while at least one out of questions  (iv) to (vi) also received a positive 
response (T able 6). 
T able 6. Steps to a successful open government initiative
A successful open government initiative ...
MUST
Identify the 
principalsAND Ensure the 
information is 
importantAND Ensure the 
information is 
accessible and 
publicized
and answer YES to ONE of the following questions
Can the principals 
respond 
meaningfully as 
individuals?OR Are officials 
supportive of 
reform?OR Can the principals 
coordinate to 
change their 
agents’ incentives?
RESULT: Improved public services, broader and deeper participation,  
reduced corruption, budgetary savings
Source: Adapted from Williamson and Eisen (2016: 2).
A positive answer to the first three questions without a positive statement 
to any of the following three questions can lead to a ‘transparency paradox’ . 
8. The term ‘principal’ relates here to the principal–agent theory, elaborated in Chapter 4.1, and refers to citizens who 
entrust public officials through direct elections or indirect appointments with a mandate to provide public services and 
administer public resources. 65‘Theory of change’: Why and how does open government influence corruption?
4.1 Corruption as a principal–agent problem
In theory, the assumption about the positive influence of transparency on 
the level of corruption results from the principal–agent theory (Klitgaard, 
1988; Rose-Ackerman, 1978), which reflects the hierarchical relation 
between subordinates and superiors in public and private organizations. 
According to the principal–agent theory, corrupt transactions occur in 
the interactions between the ‘principal’ – citizens who entrust public 
officials through direct elections or indirect appointments with a mandate 
to provide public services and administer public resources – and ‘agents’ – 
elected or appointed public officials.9 An agent will engage in corruption 
if, according to calculations, the benefits from corrupt action outweigh the 
costs (e.g. punishment). Information asymmetry is the main precondition 
for corruption, because the principal is unable to perfectly monitor the 
actions of the agent, thereby granting the agent some discretion to pursue 
their own interests. These assumptions provide the basic ingredients of 
corruption: 
Illicit behavior flourishes when agents have monopoly power over clients, 
when agents have great discretion, and when accountability of agents to the 
principal is weak (Klitgaard, 1988: 75).
For example, in the context of education, Klitgaard’s corruption formula 
(corruption = monopoly power + discretion by officials - accountability) 
provides an explanation for corruption in university accreditation. The main 
factors for corruption in this field arise from a lack of competition among 
providers and the power monopoly exerted by rectors over accreditation 
procedures (Hallak and Poisson, 2007: 65). 
Accordingly, transparency, which enables the principal to exert control 
over the agent, functions as a crucial tool for avoiding information asymmetry, 
reducing discretion, and revealing or preventing corruption. Control of 
formal authorities can punish public officials (horizontal accountability), but 
9. Robert Klitgaard (1988) differentiates between three groups of actors in his explanatory model for corruption: elected 
political authority as a ‘principal’, appointed bureaucrats and public servants as an ‘agent’, and citizens as a ‘client’. 
However, to avoid conceptual confusion, this text applies the second order principal–agent model, where ‘principal’ 
means citizens and ‘agent’ encompasses both elected and appointed public authorities.66
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativespublic control can also foster accountability through transparency (vertical 
accountability). Control, including the possibility of formal sanctions and 
rewards, is not the only leverage mechanism of transparency, however. 
Availability of information reinforces a market for better decision-making 
among actors and creates (political) competition, which functions as an 
additional incentive for public officials to avoid corruption in order to provide 
better public services (Cheng and Moses, 2016: 25 ff.). 
Major critiques of the principal–agent theoretical approach to 
corruption point out that its explanatory power is limited in societies with 
endemic corruption owing to the lack of an ‘honest’ principal willing or able 
to control the agent (e.g. Andvig and Fjeldstad, 2001: 89 ff.; Persson, 
Rothstein, and T eorell, 2013:  450  ff.). This critique leads to alternative 
explanations of corruption as a collective action problem.
4.2 Corruption as a collective action problem
When planning OG implementation, it is important to be aware of a 
contextual difference with regard to corruption: whether corruption is 
an exception (Context A) or the norm (Context B) (T able 7). The point 
of departure for analytic differentiation is to identify the central ‘norm’ 
of governance with regard to the distribution of public goods (Mungiu-
Pippidi, 2015:  15). In Context  A, the ideal type of governance is ethical 
universalism, where public goods are distributed impartially and corruption 
is an exception. Alternatively, Context B describes a state in which public 
goods are distributed on the basis of particularism and can be expropriated 
by the most powerful actors at nearly unlimited discretion. In this context, 
access to resources is limited for ordinary citizens (North et  al., 2007; 
North, Wallis, and Weingast, 2009).
Similarly, Cartier-Bresson described Context  B as ‘social exchange 
corruption’ based on corruption networks: ‘the corruption network allows 
for illegal transactions based on mercantile relationships of competition, 
hierarchy (obedience), and solidarity (confidence)’ (1997: 440). Here, 
corruption can manifest itself through patron–client relations in the form of 67‘Theory of change’: Why and how does open government influence corruption?
a vertical network, or through a horizontal network, connecting decision-
makers beyond their public offices (Stefes, 2003:  123). In contrast to 
occasional corruption, as evidenced in Context A, corruption in Context B 
demonstrates a kind of stability, which rests on a peculiar mix of asymmetrical 
power and solidarity and implicit and actual coercion, as well as an emphasis 
on mutual benefits and voluntarism (Roniger and Güneş-Ayata, 1994: 4, 
cited in: Stefes, 2006: 19). 
T able 7. Governance context of corruption practices
Features of ideal types  
of governance regimesContext A Context B
Corruption as  
an exceptionCorruption as  
the norm
Definition Individual behaviour in which 
public authority is abused, 
resulting in undue private profit Social practice where 
particularism (and not 
ethical universalism) informs 
the majority of government 
transactions, resulting in 
widespread nepotism and 
discrimination
Observable Corruption is invisible, and 
whistleblowing is necessary 
to bring it to lightCorruption is visible through overt 
behaviour and flawed processes, 
as well as outcomes/consequences 
(undue wealth)
Public–private  
separationEnshrined as the norm.  
Access is allowed and is 
transparent, with exchanges 
between both sidesFused. Permeable border with 
patrimonialism the norm and 
conflict of interest ubiquitous 
(one person belongs to both sides 
at the same time)
Problem-solving 
approachPrincipal–agent  
(restore control)Collective action 
Source: Based on Mungiu-Pippidi (2015).
In Context B, society is only rarely able to make a difference to its own 
advantage, owing to particularism among officials. Officials in this context 
are usually reluctant to engage in reform, are not responsive, and are often 
dependent on powerful economic actors, whereas citizens have little leverage 
regarding the actions of their agents. It is in this context that transparency 68
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativescan have negative unintended consequences and citizen participation can 
result in frustration due to lack of responsiveness (Bauhr and Grimes, 2014, 
2017; Bauhr, Grimes, and Harring, 2010).
4.3 Implementing open government when corruption is 
a collective action problem
The main problem in Context  B is less concerned with transparency 
and much more with responsiveness and accountability. In line with the 
model of successful OG initiatives produced by Williamson and Eisen 
(2016), countries with consolidated democracy principles can ensure 
the reaction of the agents by means of an independent judiciary, a free 
press, and fair elections. There are, however, many more countries with a 
corrupt equilibrium where these conditions are not a given, and citizens as 
a principal have very little leverage over elected and appointed agents. The 
crucial question, here, is whether and how open government can shift the 
preferences of government representatives.
According to Williamson and Eisen, citizens can overcome the collective 
action problem under three conditions (2016: 14): political agency, quorum, 
and group efficacy. These conditions also correspond to the idea of Hansson 
et  al. regarding deliberation and representation through open government 
(Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg, 2015).
Political agency implies that an individual must believe that he or she 
can and should participate in the political sphere. Williamson and Eisen state 
that ‘simply informing citizens of their nominal points of authority over local 
public service providers’ can increase engagement and improve public 
services (2016). According to a research experiment in India, informing 
community members about school oversight committees in which they could 
participate and the assessment tools available to measure their children’s 
learning had a positive influence on teachers’ attendance and student benefits 
(Pandey et al., 2007; Pandey, Goyal, and Sundararaman, 2009).
Quorum implies confidence at the individual level that others will 
participate in sufficient numbers to ensure an impact. This assurance is 69‘Theory of change’: Why and how does open government influence corruption?
particularly important when participants face the risk of punishment. 
Hansson, Belkacem, and Ekenberg (2015: 549) argue in this regard that ‘the 
individual does not have the power’ in relation to deliberation . Fung (2013: 
208) comes to a similar conclusion that ‘professionals and organizations 
often constitute the most important users of public disclosures’ , rather than 
individuals. Another article by Cornford et al. (2013) that questions the 
ability of local communities to interpret open data comes to the conclusion 
that a quorum can be provided when local groups of interest connect to 
global networks in order to obtain ideas for data interpretation.
An effectiveness study of school committees in public schools in 
Indonesia reveals, for instance, that ‘measures that foster outside ties between 
the school committee and other parties, linkage and election, lead to greater 
engagement by education stakeholders and in turn to learning’ (Pradhan 
et al., 2014: 124). Thus, increased community support was crucial for the 
effectiveness of the school committees, while the availability of grants and 
training demonstrated only limited effects. The authors note, however, that 
raising learning outcomes was contingent on the community electing the 
committee, as well as on the support of a powerful community institution. 
For instance, the involvement of the village council in planning activities 
‘provided the legitimacy needed to ensure that actions that could improve 
learning were implemented’ (Pradhan et al., 2014: 125).
Group efficacy means that an individual must believe that if the group 
acts, meaningful change will occur. Communication and research about so-
called ‘islands’ of integrity is useful to support group efficacy. In addition, 
setting initial indicators for the success and failure of an initiative will allow 
for objective measurement and enable group efficacy to be approached in 
an unbiased manner. 70
Chapter 5
Operationalizing open government
5.1 A working definition of open government
Based on the critical approach to conceptualization presented above, 
this section elaborates and operationalizes a working definition of open 
government (see Figure 3).
The term ‘partnership’ in the definition includes citizen participation 
and collaboration. These are impossible without meaningful transparency 
and are only effective when government accountability and responsiveness 
are in place. Accordingly, the core OG principles are conceptualized as short-
term outcomes necessary to reach public value as a long-term goal.
As the objective of open government, public value implies a need to 
identify concrete stakeholders as a group of beneficiaries among the general 
public at the beginning of the OG process. Beneficiaries as the ‘principal’ define 
the type of public value that will derive from the OG process (e.g. economic, 
political, social, strategic, quality of life, ideological, stewardship).
5.2 The specifics of open government in education: A sectoral 
approach
Stakeholders in the education sector
The main focus of this study is formal education that is institutionalized, 
intentional, and planned through public and recognized private institutions 
(OECD, 2018b : 24). UNESCO (2017a ) refers to several groups of 
stakeholders relevant for open government in education: governments, 
schools, teachers, parents, students, international organizations, and 
the private sector. All these stakeholders have different interests with 71Operationalizing open government
regard to public value potentially generated by open government. These 
divergent interests give rise to the particularities of open government in 
the education sector:
1. Children and young adults (pupils and students): A particularity of 
the education sector is that education is considered not as a service for 
children and young adults, but as a human right (García Reyes, 
2018: 17 ff,). Principle 7 of the UN Declaration of the Rights of the 
Child states that: 
The child is entitled to receive education, which shall be free and compulsory, 
at least in the elementary stages. He shall be given an education which will 
promote his general culture and enable him, on a basis of equal opportunity, 
to develop his abilities, his individual judgement, and his sense of moral 
and social responsibility, and to become a useful member of society (United 
Nations, 1959). 
 Accordingly, the central objective of open government with regard to 
children is to provide equal access to education and secure its proper 
quality, independent of social, ethnic, or gender background (García 
Reyes, 2018: 17 ff.).
2. Parents and relevant associations: Children are restricted in their 
agency and are accordingly dependent on their parents. The UN 
Declaration states that 
the best interests of the child shall be the guiding principle of those 
responsible for his education and guidance; that responsibility lies in the 
first place with his parents (United Nations, 1959: Principle 7).
 As representatives of their children, parents are important stakeholders 
in the education sector, and as such are entitled to ensure that the service 
provided by the education system is in the best interests of their children. 
However, it is important to take into consideration the different social 
backgrounds of parents, as ‘a middle-class paradigm of parent 
engagement’ is not feasible in all cases (US Department of Education, 
2013:  30  ff.). In order to provide equity in education, schools also 72
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesFigure 3. Working definition of open government
Open government is a principal-centred process of governance aimed at creating public 
value in a partnership between public authorities and citizens
Beneficiaries
⇓ObjectivesOG dimensions as 
value-generating mechanisms:
Open governmental data,  
open budgeting, open contracting, 
open policy-making, open innovation,  
social audits, etc.Results
Input Output
(short term)Outcome 
(medium term)Impact
Step 1: Identify 
stakeholders for 
the partnership, 
including an 
assessment of their 
skills (know-how) 
and possibilities 
with regard to open 
government
 Step 2: Define the 
type of public value 
as an objective
 Step 3: Define 
appropriate 
value-generating 
mechanisms, 
including an 
assessment of the 
specific contextTransparency:
Open data
Access to 
information
Disclosure
Records 
managementCitizen 
participation:
Citizen 
engagement
Citizen sourcing
Collaboration:
Collaborative 
service delivery
Intra-
governmental 
partneringImproved 
public services:
Effectiveness 
Efficiency
Efficacy
Public re-use:
Economic and 
social added 
value
Good 
governance:
Decreasing 
corruption 
Increasing public 
trustPublic value: 
Economic 
Political 
Social 
Strategic
Quality of life 
Ideological 
Stewardship
Accountability:
Audit (internal, 
external, social)
Scrutiny 
(horizontal and 
vertical) 
Code of ethics 
and code 
of conduct 
(instruments of 
integrity)Responsiveness:
Ombudsman 
offices
Grievance redress 
and complaint 
mechanisms
Source: Authors.73Operationalizing open government
depend on the feedback and engagement of lower-class families, and 
participation mechanisms have to be designed accordingly.
3. Providers of educational services (schools and teachers): The principle 
of the best interests of the child is the central guideline for education 
providers. Upholding this principle requires responsiveness and 
collaboration with parents and children. At the same time, providers of 
education services are actors, implementing educational planning and a 
policy framework developed by decision-makers. Their involvement is 
crucial to ensuring the feasibility of education planning. For this purpose, 
OG mechanisms of collaboration can be particularly useful. 
4. Government and public administrations (G&PAs), including both 
national and local public authorities: The responsibility of government 
is to ensure ‘inclusive, equitable, high-quality education for all’ (UNESCO, 
2017a : 19). Open government can help fulfil this responsibility in several 
ways, for example, in educational planning, which is the result of the 
interplay of many different agencies. According to García Reyes,
OG in education helps governments to monitor their progress, to reach 
important goals, to identify areas that need to be prioritized, and to receive 
relevant feedback from citizens about the actions that need to be taken to 
improve education (García Reyes, 2018: 18).
 On the one hand, education is ‘a collective responsibility’ (UNESCO, 
2017a: 6) that requires the involvement of national, local, and school-
level actors. As an issue of great concern to people, it also has a strong 
local dimension. Accordingly, participation functions as a useful 
mechanism to generate interest among different stakeholders. However, 
education policy is highly centralized in most countries, which restricts 
the capacity of local authorities and the actions of providers of education 
services. As a result, collaboration in the form of intra-governmental 
partnering and collaborative service delivery function as important 
mechanisms to generate public value through open government. For 
instance, the US Equity and Excellence Commission suggests that:
Regionalization – whether it is the sharing of administrative and other costs 
and capacities among districts, the creation of larger districts or the effective 74
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesuse of technology – may allow districts to provide educational services in 
a more cost-effective and efficient manner and allow them to invest their 
limited resources in improved teaching and learning opportunities (US 
Department of Education, 2013: 36).
5. Private sector: A recent UNESCO Global Education Monitoring  Report  
showed that the involvement of the private sector in education has 
increased rapidly, creating ‘a global education industry’ . While private–
public partnerships in the education sector are crucial for competitiveness 
at the national and the individual level in a disruptive global economy, 
critical voices have raised concerns about the ‘prioritization of 
profitability over learning, well-being and education as a public good’ 
(UNESCO, 2017a: 107). Accordingly, OG mechanisms such as open 
contracting and public audits can be useful to ensure accountability 
and improve the deliverables of public–private partnerships.
6. International organizations/programmes: The topic of education is 
a high priority for international organizations, international programmes 
such as the Global Partnership for Education, and international NGOs 
such as the Center for Global Education at Asia Society or the Global 
Cities Education Network. The OGP has a specific section dedicated to 
education, and education is mentioned in many OGP national action 
plans (e.g. those of Estonia, Indonesia, Moldova, Mongolia, and Slovakia), 
as well as in some subnational action plans (e.g. Kigoma-Ujiji in T anzania; 
OGP , 2018). Both international organizations and programmes play an 
important role in elaborating guidance and relevant recommendations 
for education systems, including on corruption-related issues, developing 
integrity assessments, and providing funding to support community 
participation in education, among others. 
Counteracting corruption by means of open government  
in the education sector
According to Hallak and Poisson (2007: 55), corruption undermines the 
principle of ‘education for all’ in several ways: 
[Corruption] tends to reduce the resources available for education, to limit 
access to education (particularly for the most disadvantaged groups), to 75Operationalizing open government
deteriorate the quality of education, and to increase social inequalities. 
Moreover, in a longer-term perspective, corruption entails a misallocation 
of talents and the propagation of a ‘culture of corruption’ .
The analysis of corruption in the education sector on the website 
Curbing Corruption provides an extensive overview of major corruption 
risks in education, based on a synthesis from other typologies (Figure 4).10 
Figure 4. Corruption risks in education
AT SCHOOLS – DIRECT
26. Payment to obtain  
a place
27. Payment to get good  
grades
28. Payment to receive  
exam results
29. Payment for exam  
certificates
30. Payment for exam  
questions
31. Payment for others  
to do the exam
32. Payment from discriminated 
students
33. Requiring use of  
certain textbooks
34. Duress payment  
for private tutoring
35. Duress to work  
for free for teachers
36. Teacher requiring  
sexual favoursFINANCE AND CONTROL
14. Leakage of central education 
budgets
15. Leakage of new project 
allocations
16. Theft/control of education 
assets
17. Bribes to auditors  
and monitors
AT SCHOOLS – INDIRECT
18. Accepting high absence  
levels
19. Teachers bribe  
for good postings
20. Schools used  
for private purposes
21. Theft of school budgets
22. Theft of locally  
raised funds
23. High prices for meals,  
uniforms
24. School food, repair, 
maintenance
25. Resources allocated  
by politicians to favoured schoolsPOLICY
1. Misdirection of education 
budgets
2. Misallocation to agencies, 
projects
3. Overambitious  
curriculum
TEACHERS
4. Teacher recruitment
5. Teacher promotion,  
posts, exit
6. Licences and authorizations
7. Allocation of teacher  
allowances
8. Teacher training (TT):  
selection
9. TT: grading, exams,  
graduation
PROCUREMENT
10. Textbook printing  
and distribution
11. Infrastructure contracts
12. School repair  
and maintenance
13. Improper contract 
management
Source: Kaplan and Pyman (n.d.); MEC (2017: 16).
10. For a further overview of major opportunities for corruption by area of educational planning/management, 
see Hallak and Poisson (2007:  63–64). The overview of corruption typology in higher education is available at:  
https://curbingcorruption.com/sector/higher-education.76
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesHallak and Poisson (2007) and Poisson (2010) provide evidence from 
different parts of the world that corruption can be eliminated in many of the 
above areas. This is particularly the case for 
finance in general as well as specific financial allocations (scholarships, 
grants to schools, etc.); the construction and renovation of school buildings; 
equipment, supplies, and school services (textbooks, meals, bussing, 
boarding facilities, etc.); personnel (especially teachers) management and 
behavior; information systems; pupil selection (exams, admissions to 
university, etc.); and quality assurance and accreditation of educational 
institutions (Poisson, 2010: 23).
Poisson underlines the value of the ‘virtuous triangle’ in anti-corruption 
– an approach that involves concerted action on three main fronts: 
the development of transparent regulation systems and standards, building 
management capacity, and greater public ownership of administrative and 
financial processes (Poisson, 2010: 23).
The authors further emphasize that measures taken in isolation will not 
prove effective in counteracting corruption, and that an integrated approach 
is needed (Hallak and Poisson, 2007; Poisson, 2010).
The three fronts embody the concept of open government as they 
address transparency, citizen participation for greater ownership, and 
accountability – both horizontal and vertical (see Figure 5 ). Open government 
allows corruption to be tackled in both contexts – where corruption is an 
exception and horizontal accountability is in place (Context A), and where 
corruption is the norm and the institutions responsible for scrutiny are either 
corrupt or politicized or not available (Context B). In Context A, where 
horizontal accountability is institutionalized and scrutiny works well, open 
government will focus on medium-term outcomes such as improved public 
services and public re-use by means of needs analysis. In Context B, where 
corruption is the norm, the task of value-generating OG mechanisms is to 
create vertical scrutiny and improve horizontal scrutiny, with the aim of 
fostering good governance in the education system. The empirical evidence 
for this assumption is elaborated in Chapter 8. 77Operationalizing open government
5.3 Operationalizing open government in the education sector: 
Working definition, tools, and objectives
Working definition
T ransparency has a threefold function. First, transparency of standards and 
procedures creates a market for competition between education providers 
and teachers in the form of ranking, but also in the field of contracting for 
education in the form of open data. Fair and open market competition is 
an important incentive for the improvement of public services. Second, 
open data and big data analysis enable better assessment of education 
infrastructure, with a view to providing an appropriate number of schools 
in line with demographic developments. Third, transparency acts as 
the foundation for the vertical and horizontal accountability of public 
administrations and providers of education services. The functions of 
citizen participation include assessment of needs, especially with regard to 
children. In addition, the participation of teachers in education planning 
allows for local, context-related feasibility checks of education planning. 
Public participation and intra-governmental collaboration are thus 
indispensable to the mechanisms of vertical and horizontal accountability.
Open government tools in education
Figure 5  lists several value-generating mechanisms of open government in 
the sector of education. The list of OG tools in education is not exhaustive 
and individual tools can be created upon specific demand and depending 
on the local context. However, some mechanisms are especially common in 
education. These include the following:
• School report cards (SRCs) ‘typically refer to the aggregation of 
education information at the school level [and are used to] inform the 
general public about school performance, so as to enable stakeholders 
to more effectively hold schools and districts accountable for education 
quality’ (Cheng and Moses, 2016: 20). 78
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiatives• School portals may be viewed as a variation of SRCs, the implementation 
of which can range from non-interactive online pages with basic school 
information (digital ‘notice boards’) to comprehensive online systems 
based on open data.
• School committees are usually understood as ‘autonomous bodies 
providing a place for societal participation in education and creating 
conditions for transparency and accountability’ (Vernez, Karam, and 
Marshall, 2012: 8). The composition of membership may vary between 
parent-only, parent–teacher, and parent–teacher–community. The 
mandate of school committees varies across countries and may range 
from the management of teachers and funds to functioning as a 
consultative body.
• Social audits or community monitoring describe ‘a process through 
which citizens (facilitated by NGOs) scrutinize government-reported 
expenditures and other records and cross-check them against actual 
expenditures’ (Kapur, Sahgal, and Choudhary, 2014: 155). In education, 
this process is sometimes linked to SRCs, with certain information for 
SRCs sourced directly from communities.
• Public Expenditure T racking Surveys (PETS) and  Quantitative 
Service Delivery Surveys (QSDS) ensure horizontal scrutiny and 
enable the measurement of corrupt practices in the education sector. 
PETS track non-salary expenditure from the central ministry of 
education level to the school level and aim to calculate leakage rates 
(Poisson, 2010: 5). QSDS collect quantitative data on the efficiency of 
public spending and the different aspects of service delivery, usually 
represented by schools in the education sector (e.g. teacher absenteeism) 
(Poisson, 2010: 6).
Examples of the implementation and impacts of these tools are 
presented in the case studies in Chapters 7 and 8.79Operationalizing open governmentFigure 5. Working definition of open government in education
Open government in education is a process of governance based on the principle of ‘the best interests of the child’, to ensure  
inclusive, equitable, and high-quality education for all through partnership between the main stakeholders in the education system.
Beneficiaries
ObjectivesOG dimensions and tools as value-generating mechanisms Results
InputOutput 
(short term)Outcome
(medium term)Impact
Stakeholders:
Children and  
young adults 
Parents and 
relevant 
associations
Providers of 
education 
services
G&PA
Private sector
International 
organizations  
and programmesTransparency 
(of standards and procedures):
Open data
School portals
SRCs
Open budgeting 
Open contracting
Open parliamentary committees on education
Citizen participation and collaboration (in educational planning):
School committees, local education councils
Participatory/decentralized educational planning 
Participatory budgeting 
E-tools for school assessment (e.g. Checkmyschool, ‘Improve Your 
School’, mobile phone panel)
Citizens’ assessment cards
Social audit framework for education
Accountability and responsiveness:
Horizontal scrutiny (control of the executive by other political 
institutions): e.g. PETS, QSDS, audits
Vertical scrutiny (monitoring by civil society and the media): e.g. report 
cards, external public audits
Codes of conduct (for public authorities, providers of education services, 
pupils, and students)Improved public services:
Effectiveness 
Efficiency
Efficacy
Public re-use:
Economic and social added 
value: e.g. better distribution 
of resources, e.g. appropriate 
number of schools, teachers, 
sport places are distributed 
upon request
High quality of learning
Pupils have good access to 
relevant learning resources, 
receive appropriate day care 
(e.g. quality of food in the 
school).
Good governance:
Decreasing corruption in 
education 
Increasing public trust in 
education systems
Fostering academic integrityPublic value
=> Principle ‘Best 
interests of the child’: 
Equal access to 
education 
Education equity
High quality of 
education
Source: Authors.80
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesOpen government impact in education
Figure 5  lists equal access to education, education equity, and quality as the 
main objectives of open government in the education sector. These long-
term objectives derive from the main stakeholders – children and students – 
whose rights to equal, equitable, and high-quality education are considered 
to be human rights and are captured by the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals (Goal 4, ‘Quality Education’). In order to estimate the success of OG 
initiatives, it is necessary to operationalize the main impact criteria. 
UNESCO defines the difference between education equality and equity 
as follows:
Equity and equality are contested terms, used differently by different people. 
Following Jacob and Holsinger (2008: 4) we define equality  as ‘the state of 
being equal in terms of quantity, rank, status, value or degree’ , while equity  
‘considers the social justice ramifications of education in relation to the 
fairness, justness and impartiality of its distribution at all levels or 
educational sub-sectors’ . We take equity to mean that a distribution  is fair or 
justified. Equity involves a normative judgement of a distribution, but how 
people make that judgement will vary (UIS, 2018: 17).
Although assessment of the impact criteria for education may vary 
around the world, the recent UNESCO Handbook on Measuring Equity in 
Education  (2018) develops common ground for cross-national assessments 
and serves as a manual for operationalization: ‘It provides a conceptual 
framework for measuring equality in learning; offers methodological 
guidance on how to calculate and interpret indicators; and investigates the 
extent to which measuring equity in learning has been integrated into country 
policies, national planning and data collection and analysis’ (UIS, 2018: 13). 
Figure 6  shows how open government can accommodate the principle of the 
‘best interest of the child’ .81Operationalizing open government
Figure 6. Open government in education, based on the principle of 
the best interests of the child (PBIC)
Source: Authors.Vertical 
accountability and 
responsivenessCollaboration 
and horizontal 
accountability
Citizen participation and 
collaboration 
G&PA
Inclusiveness Quality
PBIC
EquityChildren 
and parents, 
parent 
associationsProviders of 
educational 
services82
Chapter 6
Local governance and a contextual approach 
to open government
This chapter focuses on local and contextual approaches to open 
government. It begins by exploring the advantages and obstacles of the local 
approach to open government, with specific implications for the education 
sector. It then highlights the specific role of the political and administrative 
context for OG implementation in education. 
6.1 The local governance approach to open government
The global trend towards local open government
In 2016, the OGP launched the Subnational Government Pilot Program 
consisting of 15 ‘pioneer’ subnational governments who signed the Open 
Government Subnational Declaration (OGP , 2016) and initiated OGP 
subnational action plans (OGP , 2017). The main justification for extending 
OGP to the local level is as follows:
Local governments are closer to the people and their work has a more direct 
impact on citizens’ everyday lives than national level governments. With 
increased populations in urban areas come increasing demands for services 
and the need for more effective and responsive local level governments. 
(OGP , n.d.a)
The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of 
Europe has incorporated the concept of open government into its agenda 
and recently adopted Resolution 435 (2018) on T ransparency and Open 
Government (Galster, 2018). The Congress recognizes open government as 
a priority action to prevent corruption and to promote ethics in public 
administration at local and regional levels. 83Local governance and a contextual approach to open government
In addition, the OECD pledged in its recent report on open government 
data to focus on local governments (OECD, 2018a : 215 ff.). The report refers 
to several studies which show that
[o]pen data ecosystems are often more vibrant at the city and/or municipal 
level. Local authorities have more means and opportunities to identify and 
engage communities of data re-users. Local authorities are generally closer to 
citizens, offer more direct services to citizens and work in areas that have an 
immediate impact on citizens. They are therefore more likely to be used to 
developing services that are of interest to citizens (OECD, 2018a : 215–216).
Finally, the Declaration of Local Open Government Principles requires 
cities to share best practices and software and other resources with other 
government entities, as well as to ‘create a legal framework that will 
institutionalize the principles of transparency, participation, and collaboration 
into the culture and work of city government’ (Open Government Initiative, 
n.d.).
Rationale and challenges for open government at the local level 
of governance
The trend to foster OG principles at the local level is substantiated by 
theoretical and empirical studies and international documents. 
The controversial influence of decentralization 
The idea that decentralization is a useful tool for counteracting corruption has 
been highly disputed in the academic literature. The theoretical foundation 
for the positive effect of decentralization on counteracting corruption 
dates back to Klitgaard’s corruption formula (see Chapter  4.1). However, 
an assessment by the World Bank (Mansuri and Rao, 2013: 121 ff.) shows 
that, in practice, decentralization can have negative effects and reinforce 
corruption by increasing the opportunities for its occurrence. The authors of 
the report conclude that the implementation of OG principles, in particular 
citizen participation and audits, and high levels of media exposure are critical 
for decentralization to have a positive effect on counteracting corruption.84
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesFinancial decentralization is particularly important for implementing 
OG tools for citizen participation such as participatory budgeting. As the 
research on participatory budgeting in Central and Eastern European 
Countries shows, ‘limited financial autonomy of the local governments and 
the prevailing political culture (combined with weak civil society) are likely 
to constitute the main challenges to implementing participatory budgeting’ 
(Krenjova and Raudla, 2013: 18).
Proximity to citizens
Several researchers substantiate the importance of open government at the 
local level, highlighting governments’ proximity both to citizens and the 
point of delivery of services (Lipovsek, 2016; Robinson and Heller, 2015; 
Rumbul and Shaw, 2017). According to Robinson and Heller (2015), 
local governments, in particular, face major challenges in terms of delivery 
of basic social services to citizens. Despite the significant authority and 
financial resources at their disposal to provide public services, especially 
in federal and decentralized systems, coordination of policy-making, as 
well as the fragmentation and overlap of the judiciary with other levels 
of government, can represent serious obstacles. However, Robinson and 
Heller (2015) also note that OG approaches such as making data available 
in the public domain and enhancing transparency in decision-making can 
address and mitigate some of these problems.
Advantages and challenges of high-tech cities 
The Declaration of Local Open Government Principles states that the 
development of new technologies and an increasingly connected and 
engaged population have increased pressure on cities and municipalities 
to commit to the core principles of open government (Open Government 
Initiative, n.d.). Such commitments also underpin the increasing trend for 
open cities and  smart cities. While the term ‘open city’ encompasses social 
concepts of transparency, participation, and accountability, the term ‘smart 
city’ is used ‘in a context of data re-use for economic purposes aimed at 85Local governance and a contextual approach to open government
making citizens’ lives easier by providing them with data-driven services’ 
(Granickas, 2015: 4).
The re-use of open data for economic and social purposes not only faces 
the challenge of data publication, but also the challenge of proper data 
interpretation. As research on OG data in England shows, local communities 
in particular have encountered problems with correctly using open data. The 
integration of local communities into a network of wider global interests can 
help to overcome such problems and create more innovative ‘interpretative’ 
environments (Cornford et al., 2013). 
Municipalities are becoming the main administrative units to introduce 
‘civic technology’11 – NGO-led digital initiatives designed to bridge the gap 
between citizens and institutions (Rumbul and Shaw, 2017: 1). Research on 
five cases of successful implementation of civic technology in US cities 
concluded that 
incremental digital integration and the development of online tools for, and 
within, [municipal] government, provides fertile ground for increasing 
citizen engagement and improving service and policy making itself, reducing 
complexity and increasing usability (Rumbul and Shaw, 2017: 14). 
At the same time, the analysis shed light on potential challenges to the 
use of civic technologies. The main obstacle resulting in negative, unintended 
impacts is lack of responsiveness on the part of government: 
If the interactions produced through civic tech tools do not produce 
responses, citizens are likely to lose confidence in digital tools and refrain 
from using them in the future, returning communications to individualised 
email, in-person or phone interactions that ultimately are more expensive 
for government to provide (Rumbul and Shaw, 2017: 13). 
T o achieve positive outcomes, civic tech tools need ongoing 
development support in order to remain relevant to users. Any digital tools 
that become unusable owing to poor maintenance are likely to reduce the 
11.  A ‘civic tech(nology) tool’ is defined as an ‘online software function, located on a single website or mobile app, which 
is implemented to improve the experience of citizens through increasing opportunities for the public to participate in 
governmental decision-making or service delivery’ (Rumbul and Shaw, 2017: 5).86
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesconfidence that citizens have in their effectiveness and the commitment of 
the responsible public body (Rumbul and Shaw 2017: 13).
Another challenge for civic tech is to overcome the digital divide. The 
analysis showed that ‘without sufficient outreach, digital services will reach 
only those who are already comfortable with technology’ (Rumbul and Shaw 
2017: 13), in spite of the fact that the initial idea of civic tech was to encourage 
otherwise passive citizens to participate.
Another trend common to large cities is the use of social media as an 
interactive platform between municipal government and citizens. Increasing 
use of social media allows for two-way interaction between citizens and 
authorities, whereas previous online opportunities such as survey and 
comment forms were restricted to one-way citizen feedback. Research on 
the 75 largest US cities by Mossberger, Wu, and Crawford (2013) shows 
that between 2011 and 2013 adoption of social networks by municipal 
governments increased six times over. Indicators for interactivity between 
citizens and municipal authorities also increased over this period. Another 
research project in the Netherlands shows how social media enables citizens 
to create Communities of Public Service Support. These virtual communities 
of citizens constitute an important supplement to formal forms of public 
service (Meijer, Grimmelikhuijsen, and Brandsma, 2012: 21). They are 
especially important for urban areas, where personal networks, such as family 
and friends, are not as dense as in rural areas.
A number of critical voices stress, however, that ‘if two-way interaction 
between citizens and local authorities is to occur on social networks, 
participation online will require time and management by government’ 
(Mossberger, Wu, and Crawford, 2013: 356).
6.2 An overview of contextual factors for open government
The theoretical analysis in this study (see especially Chapter 4 ), as well as the 
empirical survey of mapped cases (see Chapter 7 ), suggests that structural 
and contextual factors , such as the political system and socio-economic 87Local governance and a contextual approach to open government
development at the national and subnational level, impact opportunities 
for the introduction of OG initiatives and determine their effectiveness and 
efficiency. The most important factors are as follows:
• The specific context of corruption where corruption is an exception 
(Context A) or the norm (Context B) plays an important role in the 
design and implementation of OG processes for several reasons. Firstly, 
a high level of corruption correlates with a low level of trust, which 
hinders citizen participation and collaboration (Charron and Rothstein, 
2018; Habibov, Afandi, and Cheung, 2017). Secondly, in Context B, 
corruption undermines horizontal accountability owing to clientelism 
and patronage in political institutions. In other words, the system of 
checks and balances is undermined, which hinders efforts towards both 
transparency and participation. For this reason, the short-term 
objectives of the OG process in Context  B are expected to have a 
stronger focus on vertical accountability and differ from those in 
Context  A, where horizontal accountability is in place. In order to 
operationalize the context of corruption for further analysis, 
T ransparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) is 
applied (T ransparency International, 2018).12 Countries that score 
higher than 50 points on the CPI are assigned to Context A, while those 
scoring lower than 40 points are included in Context B. 
• Decentralization (in unitary or federal states) may be more conducive 
to introducing OG dimensions that require community participation. 
Decentralization usually means that local governments have more 
resources and authority. This leads to the assumption that local 
communities have greater incentives to monitor the usage of public 
funds and assess the quality of provided public services. In turn, 
powerful local self-governance, if on board, can foster citizen 
12. The CPI is often criticized for its methodological shortcomings. The main shortcoming is that the Index does not 
present an objective measurement of corruption but instead reflects perceptions of corruption. Corruption perception 
is, however, more relevant for correlations between corruption and trust, as well as corruption and accountability, than 
objective measures of corruption (see, for example, ideas about ‘power of expectation’ in Hale, 2015).88
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesparticipation and reinforce the OG process, thereby also contributing 
to national governance.
• Socio-economic conditions influence OG initiatives. While economic 
conditions define the resources at a government’s disposal for 
experiments with open government, social conditions may have an 
ambiguous impact on citizens’ willingness and capacity to participate 
in OG initiatives. As such, low literacy and internet penetration rates 
may make (digital) open data initiatives obsolete. Conversely, high 
literacy rates among the population and relative wealth may reduce 
barriers for participation. At the same time, opposite cases have also 
been identified, where disadvantaged communities had more interest 
in participatory tools than urban elites (e.g. Roy and Miah, 2018). The 
impact of socio-economic factors is often mitigated by awareness-raising 
and capacity-building efforts.
• Political factors, such as coups and elections, usually cancel out or reduce 
OG efforts, whereas the ideological orientations of incumbent 
governments may, in some cases, facilitate faster adoption of participatory 
approaches to policy-making, as was the case of the Workers’ Party in 
Brazil’s Porto Alegre (Heller, 2001) and a socialist regional leadership in 
Poitou-Charentes, France (T alpin and Zobel, 2011). 
• Ongoing development aid and democratization programmes  from 
international donors (in the identified cases, mostly the World Bank) 
can provide necessary technical support and resources for open 
government in education. They may also hinder progress if the local 
context is not considered (e.g. Beichelt et al., 2014).
• Civil society strength and sustainability serve as a foundation for 
successful OG initiatives, largely because citizens with experiences in 
associational life are more likely to be active in OG initiatives, specifically 
in education.89Local governance and a contextual approach to open government
The above list of factors is not exhaustive, and the combination of several 
structural and contextual factors is often crucial for the result. For instance, 
some factors (e.g. socio-economic conditions) indicate an ambiguous impact 
on open government in different contexts. For these reasons, further empirical 
research and critical assessment of these factors in OG projects is necessary. 90
Chapter 7
Mapping initiatives conducted  
in the education sector
The mapping exercise utilized maximum variation sampling in order to 
identify the widest possible range of applications of open government 
in education, and to cover all theoretical dimensions and as many world 
regions as possible. For the same reason, no time frame for cases was set, 
although preference was given to the most recent cases (since 2010). 
Sources for the cases consisted of: state-of-the-art reports and case 
studies on transparency, participation, and accountability in education 
from international organizations (IIEP , the OECD, the OGP , UNESCO, 
and the World Bank); case studies and reports from CSOs (e.g. G-Watch, 
Inclusive Cities Observatory, the International Initiative for Impact 
Evaluation, the Open Contracting Partnership, the OPENCities Project of 
the British Council, and the Open Data Impact project); scholarly articles 
incorporating impact assessments of OG initiatives (e.g. the Journal of the 
European Economic Association, the Journal of Public Economics, and the 
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy); and Campbell Systematic 
Reviews, a database containing policy impact assessments. 
The sampling procedure identified 34 cases of OG initiatives in 26 
countries across 6 world regions. The East Asia and Pacific region was 
represented by one case from Australia, one from Indonesia, and four from 
the Philippines (including a case in the Autonomous Region of Muslim 
Mindanao). In Europe, the study identified one case each in France (Poitou-
Charentes), Germany (Moers), Lithuania, Moldova, Slovenia (Kranjska 
Gora), Ukraine (Lviv), and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland (UK). In Latin America and the Caribbean, there were 
individual cases in Colombia (Bogotá), El Salvador, Mexico, Paraguay 
(Ciudad del Este), and Peru, and two cases in Brazil. North America was 91Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
represented by one case from Canada (Alberta) and four cases from the USA 
(New Y ork City and the state of Virginia). In South Asia, there were individual 
cases in India, Nepal, and Pakistan. Finally, in sub-Saharan Africa, there were 
single cases in Ghana, Niger, Kenya, and Uganda, and two cases in T anzania. 
For an overview of the cases and their sources, see Annex 3. 
The depth of analysis of the sampled cases varies in the original sources. 
For some cases, impact analysis studies using scientific methods such as 
randomized controlled experiments are available. Other cases consist of mere 
descriptions of actions taken and may be considered anecdotal evidence at 
best. Both types of case sources were considered. While descriptive and 
analytical literature were used to capture trends in relation to what is being 
done with reference to open government in education, cases with impact 
assessment were used to understand the challenges and enablers of OG 
initiatives in a more systematic manner. The identified cases are not equal in 
their focus on education: while some represent initiatives exclusively for the 
purposes of improving various educational processes and outcomes 
(e.g. school-based management [SBM] initiatives and social audit platforms), 
in other cases education is merely one of several targeted sectors in a general 
OG strategy (e.g. open contracting or participatory budgeting at the city 
level). Finally, identifying purely city-level cases constituted a challenge for 
this publication, as the majority of education systems are highly centralized. 
It was thus deemed more relevant to analyse local implementation of 
nationwide initiatives. Along with six city-level initiatives, the overview 
therefore covers five cases at the subnational unit level (state or province in 
federal systems such as Australia, India, or the USA, or cases of municipal 
action connected to national programmes, such as the case in Moldova), 
while the remaining cases (23) refer to the national level.
Most of the identified projects have transparency as their primary target 
(13 projects), followed by accountability (11 projects) and participation (11 
projects). Often, projects target at least two OG components, with the most 
frequent combinations being accountability and participation (six cases), 
followed by a combination of transparency and accountability (four projects) 
and participation and transparency (one project). The fact that accountability 92
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesof government to citizens often accompanies two other components suggests 
that practitioners see it as a critical outcome of OG initiatives, as identified 
in T able 8. At the same time, the surveyed cases demonstrate that achieving 
direct accountability as a component and as a medium-term outcome of 
open government is often challenging, owing to structural factors and 
citizens’ capacities.
T able 8.  Open government principles aligned with government 
functions, and project examples
Government function Transparency Participation and 
collaborationAccountability and 
responsiveness
Budgeting => 
Open budgetingOpen budget: public 
access to information 
on collecting and 
spending public fundsParticipatory 
budgeting: public 
involvement in/
influences spending 
decisionsSocial audit of 
budget: the public 
can hold decision-
makers accountable for 
spending decisions
Project examples New York City 
Comptroller’s portal 
(USA), Ciudad 
del Este school 
funding (Paraguay), 
information on school 
transfers in the local 
media (Uganda)Particpatory Budgeting 
New York City (PBNYC) 
(USA), School 
District participatory 
budgeting Poitou-
Charentes (France), 
Kranjska Gora youth 
participatory budget 
(Slovenia), Lviv 
participatory budget 
(Ukraine)
Contracting =>  
Open contractingPublic have access to 
information on the full 
contracting cycleThe public are involved 
in one or more stages 
of contracting cyclesThe public can hold 
decision-makers 
accountable for 
contracting decisions
Project examples New York City open 
data portal (USA)Textbook procurement 
(Philippines), school 
meals procurement 
(Bogotá, Colombia)
Policy-making => 
open policy-makingPublic have access to 
information on how 
policy is made, and by 
whomThe public are involved 
in informing, making, 
implementing, and 
evaluating policiesThe public can hold 
decision-makers 
accountable for how 
they make policies and 
what they achieve93Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
Government function Transparency Participation and 
collaborationAccountability and 
responsiveness
Project examples Open parliamentary 
committees’ hearings 
on education (Ghana)Lithuania 2030, 
decennial National 
Education Plan 
(Brazil), Minister’s 
Youth Council (Alberta, 
Canada)
Service delivery => 
open innovation 
and social auditsThe public have 
access to information 
on their rights and 
entitlements, and the 
governance, funding, 
and performance of 
public servicesThe public are 
involved in designing, 
commissioning, 
delivering, and 
evaluating public 
servicesThe public can hold 
decision-makers 
accountable for the 
quality and accessibility 
of public services
Project examples My School (Australia), 
Virginia SRCs 
(USA), * SRCs in 
Punjab (Pakistan), 
OpenARMM 
(Philippines), 
General Certificate of 
Secondary Education 
(GSCE) Guide (UK), 
info-campaign for 
standardized testing 
(Peru), Kigoma Ujiji 
transparency in 
education platform 
(Tanzania)My School ** 
(Moldova),  monitoring 
of school buildings 
(Philippines), 
collaborative open data 
school project (Moers, 
Germany) Checkmyschool 
(Philippines), school 
committees (Indonesia, 
Kenya, Niger), 
village education 
committees (India), 
EDUCO (El Salvador’s 
Community-Managed 
School Program), 
mobile phone 
panel (Tanzania), 
Improve Your School 
(Mexico), extension 
of the national Basic 
Education Development 
Index (Sao Paulo, 
Brazil), social audit 
committees (Nepal)
Source: Authors. 
Notes: * This case targets the accountability of schools but is not linked to citizen assessment. Therefore, 
in terms of citizen participation this initiative refers only to transparency. ** This case targets 
accountability at the school level; however, since there are no sanctions for not performing on budgets 
or for low scores on participatory report cards, there is no working mechanism for citizens to ensure 
that schools adhere to quality standards. At the same time, the project helped to increase community 
and local self-governance bodies’ engagement in school matters.94
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiatives7.1 Open government dimensions in education
The identified projects represent the whole range of OG dimensions. This 
enables preliminary conclusions to be drawn about specific dimensions. 
The identified cases relating to open budgets in Uganda (1995–2000) and 
Ghana (2012)13 demonstrate two different national approaches to reaching 
citizens: the first involves publishing information on school transfers 
through local media; the second consists of the opening of parliamentary 
education committees to citizens. Four other cases are illustrative of a 
more participatory approach to open budgets. The case of Kranjska Gora 
(Slovenia) demonstrated a local approach with a focus on youth participatory 
budgets ( https://obcina.kranjska-gora.si/dogodek/165559). Although 
not focused on education, most of the projects pitched on the platform 
concern informal education. The case of Lviv (Ukraine), although, again, 
not specifically focused on education, demonstrated that in the absence of 
infrastructure funding, schools and kindergartens can become the most 
active users of participatory budgeting.
The most informative cases are those of participatory budgeting in New 
Y ork City (PBNYC, USA) and School District Participatory Budgeting in 
the region of Poitou-Charentes (France). The former is an initiative of several 
City Council members that offers their constituencies greater input in the 
spending of discretionary budgeting. Education in public schools is just one 
of several primary areas of responsibility at the city level, but it is the sector 
that receives the most focus in PBNYC. The Poitou-Charentes participatory 
budgeting process, on the other hand, was launched as a regional initiative 
specifically for public schools. Both initiatives have experienced high 
participation rates among their respective constituencies. 
Open data  can take the form of an independent instrument (data 
portal) or may function as part of other OG initiatives. For example, open 
data on government procurement in Bogotá (Colombia) have been used to 
introduce an open contracting process, while in Australia open data exists 
13. Ghana, however, does not score well on the overall open budget criteria (IBP , 2017); therefore, this case is illustrative 
of the approach but should not be considered a best practice.95Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
as a product in its own right – ‘My School’ , which provides access to school 
funding and performance data. Open data are an essential element of the 
open contracting process, as illustrated by the case of New Y ork City. The 
city’s ordinance envisages the publication of administration procurement 
plans at least five months in advance. This is done with splits by departments 
and agencies on the open data portal (NYC Open Data, 2018), a process 
that allows vendors to make plans for the bidding process. Additionally, the 
NYC Comptroller’s portal also functions as an open data tool offering 
datasets with information on spending, payroll, and contracts split by 
agencies including the Department of Education.14 Re-use, as a key feature 
of open data, is evident in two further cases. In Ceudad del Este (Paraguay), 
a local NGO was able to track funding for the renovation of school 
infrastructure faster and more efficiently than before. In the UK, a media 
outlet and an NGO created the GCSE Guide as a user-friendly database for 
school comparison, based on existing open data on school performance and 
funding, to ease school selection for parents. 
Open contracting has been used for the procurement of school meals 
(in Bogotá, Colombia) and textbooks (Philippines) with a view to increasing 
the trust of business and citizens and improving service provision. In both 
cases, low product quality paired with high government spending prompted 
the introduction of open contracting initiatives, while implementation rested 
with the government in Bogotá (see Chapter 7.3 for details) and relied heavily 
on an NGO (G-Watch) in the Philippines.
Social audits have been used in Mexico (‘Improve Y our School’),15 the 
Philippines (‘Checkmyschool’), Moldova (‘My School’), and T anzania, to 
tackle misappropriation of school funds and teacher absenteeism via 
community reporting to central education authorities or the school 
administration. In T anzania, a panel of citizens was selected to report on the 
quality of public services, including schools, over two years using mobile 
phones issued to them for the project. No information on the impact of this 
one-time initiative is available. The remainder of the initiatives are based on 
14. Available at: www.checkbooknyc.com/contracts_landing/yeartype/B/year/117/status/A/agency/18?expandBottomContURL=/
panel_html/contract_transactions/contract_details/magid/2279704/status/A/doctype/MA1.
15. Through the online portal www.mejoratuescuela.org.96
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesBox 8.  Participatory budgeting in New York City (PBNYC) (2012)
PBNYC was launched as a joint initiative of four New York City Council members and some 
40+ community-based CSOs in 2012 to ensure more transparency and inclusiveness in 
disbursing discretionary funds for the four district representatives in the City Council to the 
value of USD 5.6 million. Eligible projects are those involving physical improvements in 
neighbourhoods not exceeding USD 35,000 in costs and having at least five years of ‘useful 
life’. By 2018, USD 206 million had been allocated to 706 projects through the PBNYC. This 
participatory budgeting initiative does not directly target the education sector, but the majority 
of the projects fall within the scope of the New York City School Construction Authority 
(NYCSCA) and involve school building renovation, sanitation, and technological upgrades. 
The PBNYC is characterized by an emphasis on communication with and the inclusion of 
populations who usually do not engage with authorities and are not politically active. These 
groups include poor citizens, non-citizens, non-English speakers, people of colour, women, 
and those who have never voted before. The participation rate among members of 
disadvantaged groups is higher than the proportion of those groups in their respective districts, 
suggesting a high level of engagement among traditionally marginalized groups. Such 
engagement is, at least in part, due to efforts undertaken by the City Council members’ staff, 
who specifically targeted these groups by personally inviting them to participatory budgeting 
meetings and holding participatory budgeting meetings and voting in easily reachable 
locations. As a result, some 2,000 people participated in community meetings over one cycle 
and some 6,000 people voted.
PBNYC may be assessed from two perspectives. On the one hand, its participatory nature 
contributed to the communities’ social capital as citizens learned joint problem-solving and 
additional skills such as public speaking and project management. The process also contributed 
to increasing the accountability of City Council members, as more participants now know their 
representatives personally and feel more secure in addressing their concerns to them. On the 
other hand, tangible results in terms of project implementation are yet to be seen. The majority 
of implemented projects date as far back as the 2012–13 participatory budgeting cycle, and 
approximately 90 per cent of NYCSCA projects have yet to be implemented.
Source: Kasdan and Cattell (2013); Lerner (2018). 
the development of an online platform for aggregating, collecting, and 
presenting data (see T able 9 and Annex  4  for a detailed overview). Since 
2011, the ‘Checkmyschool’ online platform has published information from 
the Ministry of Education on intended school improvements and provides 97Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
a report form for parents to verify actual work done. The platform was 
positively received by local schools owing to its inclusive nature and resulted 
in the greater involvement of provincial and municipal legislators in the fiscal 
management of education funds. Some anecdotal evidence on improvement 
in nutrition and situation with school funds is available.
The Moldovan portal ‘My School’ contains information on school 
budget analysis and the results of participatory report cards, but only for 
schools selected to participate in the larger project (which also includes 
public hearings on school budgets and participatory report cards). Although 
ostensibly a national project, the portal triggers local action. In Ungheni, the 
District Council allocated MDL 40,000 to co-finance priorities identified 
during public hearings for each beneficiary school, while at Falestii Noi the 
Mayor promised city funds to support repair of the school’s heating system 
– a need identified during public hearings on the school budget.
Open innovation has not been used as a term in the surveyed cases. 
Despite this, various innovative ways of enhancing the participation of new 
(previously left-behind) stakeholders in school-based management have 
been captured. Efforts to empower parents have been taken in El Salvador 
(EDUCO), Indonesia, India (SSA or ‘Education for All’), Niger (COGES 
school committees), and Kenya (Extra T eacher Programme in Western 
Province) to tackle the relative superiority of teachers’ authority over parents, 
which hinders teacher accountability. These cases are illustrative of the diverse 
instruments of parental empowerment, some of which have adverse effects 
on teacher–parent relations. 
In El Salvador, parent-led school boards were entrusted with power 
over teacher employment. Although this contributed to the improvement 
of learning outcomes, it disadvantaged teachers in such schools in terms of 
social protection and career opportunities – and ultimately, teacher unions 
were able to abolish this programme. In Niger, school committees consisting 
of parents were given grants (the only form of cash inflow to schools aside 
from school fees) and the discretion to decide on their usage, with options 
ranging from infrastructure improvement to teacher salaries. Again, this 
created power asymmetry vis-à-vis teachers. In many cases, school 98
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesT able 9. Overview of online platforms among surveyed cases
Country Platform TimeDecision-
making levelTargeted OG 
componentTargeted 
level of 
participationPhase of policy 
cycleOpen dataSocial 
auditSource
Australia‘My School’, www.
myschool.edu.au2010– NationalTransparency
AccountabilityInform EvaluationMostly yes 
(some specific 
data on 
request)NoRabinowitz 
(2018)
Mexico ‘Mejora tu Escuela’ 
(Improve Your 
School), www.
mejoratuescuela.org2013– NationalAccountability
TransparencyInvolveImplementation 
and monitoringMostly no 
(16% of 
datasets 
qualify)YesYoung and 
Verhulst 
(2016)
Moldova‘Școala Mea’ (My 
School), scoalamea.
md2014– NationalAccountability 
participation 
(de-facto)InvolveImplementation 
and monitoringNo YesToderas 
(2015); Vlad 
(2016)
PakistanSRC in Punjab 
Province, 
pesrp.edu.pk/
home#distranking 2013– Provincial Transparency InformImplementation 
and monitoringNo No Khan (2018)
Philippines‘Checkmyschool’, 
www.
checkmyschool.org2011– National Accountability Consult Evaluation No YesParafina 
(2018)
USAVirginia SRC, 
schoolquality.
virginia.gov1997– StateAccountability
Transparency 
(de-facto)InformPolicy 
implementation 
and monitoringYes NoCheng 
and Moses 
(2016: 48)
Source: Authors.99Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
committees were not able to secure buy-in from teachers regarding investment 
decisions, which resulted in conflict.16 In Kenyan Western Province, parents 
were empowered to hire contract teachers, but had no discretion over 
centrally appointed teachers. Although hiring additional teachers reduced 
the workload of tenured teachers, the impact was lower in schools where 
parent–teacher committees were trained to monitor teacher performance. 
In Indonesia, on the other hand, school committees consisting of 
teachers and parents were linked through a formal memorandum on joint 
actions with an emphasis on powerful local (village) self-governance. This 
agreement ensured collaboration rather than confrontation among members 
and, ultimately, contributed to positive learning outcomes. 
The case of India demonstrates diversity in terms of the use of 
opportunities by local school management organizations. For example, 
Andhra Pradesh was the only state out of 11 surveyed where all VECs made 
use of the opportunity provided by SSA to appoint teachers. In Chandigarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan less than 10 per cent of VECs did so. VECs 
in Assam took advantage of all the provided opportunities, except teacher 
appointment, while in Madhya Pradesh take-up was low, except in terms of 
improving enrolment. Improving enrolment and infrastructure maintenance 
were the most widely used opportunities across all states surveyed, rather 
than utilizing opportunities to make teacher appointments (PEO, 2010). 
Crowdsourcing policy ideas has been a feature of  open policy cases, 
as identified in Brazil and Canada. Brazil’s decennial National Education 
Plan (Plano Nacional de Educação or PNE), developed in 1997 (with a 
second round in 2007–10), included inputs from CSOs and educational 
experts. As part of this process, the Ministry of Education circulated a 
reference document, which was then amended through a public consultation 
process and endorsed by the National Education Conference. Subsequently, 
the document underwent a vote by the Chamber of Deputies. The process 
was time-consuming and resource-intensive, and was subject to the political 
situation (having already been delayed due to elections). In Canada, at the 
16. Since the programme was abolished following a coup; the available results are taken from short-term assessments. 100
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesprovincial level, the case of the Minister’s Y outh Council in Alberta is 
informative. Every year, a group of approximately 30 secondary and high 
school students participates in consultations with the Minister of Education 
on the curriculum, school fees, and other issues.
Box 9.  ‘Improve Your School’, Mexico (2013)
Mexico, a country with one of the highest levels of expenditure on education among OECD 
countries, demonstrated poor achievement levels in a 2012 Programme for International 
Student Assessment (PISA) study. At the same time, 78 per cent of Mexican parents expressed 
satisfaction with the education of their children. The root causes of this mismatch between 
expenditure on education and the perceived and actual quality of education were deemed to 
be a lack of information on the side of parents and corruption. To tackle both issues, the 
Mexican Institute for Competitiveness (IMCO) with support from the Omidyar Network 
launched the ‘Mejora tu Escuela’ (‘Improve Your School’) online platform. As a part of the 
country’s OGP commitments, the platform uses open data from the Ministry of Education 
on teacher numbers and school locations, web-scraping, data from other governmental 
authorities, and built-in parent feedback forms to construct 25+ databases, which are available 
for download.
Using these data, parents are able to compare schools by referencing standardized test results 
with 2013 census data on schools (infrastructure, number of students and teachers, location). 
The portal also has a feedback feature that allows users to grade schools, report problems, 
and search for solutions to problems.
The platform has also become a powerful tool against corruption in education. By using and 
matching existing data to parental feedback, IMCO was able to issue corruption reports that 
uncovered misappropriation of funds for non-existent schools and ‘ghost teachers’. Even 
prior to the public release of this report, 10 states launched independent audits of their 
education systems’ funding, while teacher payrolls were moved from the state to the federal 
level. There were also cases of teachers being fired due to absenteeism following reports made 
through the platform, while in general parents felt more empowered to communicate with 
teachers when they had more information. A number of school principals also reacted 
positively towards the platform, claiming that prior to its creation they were unaware of 
funding to which they were entitled.
Source: Young and Verhulst (2016).101Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
7.2 Open government and functions of participation17
The surveyed cases suggest that each OG dimension may be associated 
with more than one function of participation. This implies that for the same 
umbrella term for an OG dimension, different designs can yield different 
opportunities for decision-making by citizens. For instance, open budgets  
(Ghana, Uganda) and open data  (Australia) cases only provide information 
in the hope that citizens will demand accountability from schools and local 
education officials on the use of funds and the quality of services. Conversely, 
participatory budgeting in New Y ork City and Poitou-Charentes offer 
deliberation opportunities that empower citizens to provide their priorities 
and decide on concrete projects to be implemented by the authorities. 
Open contracting has been able to trigger both the consulting and 
collaborating functions of participation. In the case of Bogotá, businesses 
were consulted prior to the re-design of a purchasing and bidding process, 
and some of the insights thus gathered led to the split of the procurement 
process between food and services supply. In the case of textbook 
procurement, the Ministry of Education of the Philippines collaborated with 
civil society on amending the procurement process and implemented many 
of its recommendations. 
Social audits can trigger the consulting function of participation 
(reporting on the quality of services via ‘Checkmyschool’ [Philippines] or 
through participatory report cards [‘My School’ in Moldova] and the mobile 
phone panel in T anzania) and involve citizens in policy implementation 
(school monitoring in the Philippines). 
Open innovation focuses on ways to empower previously disadvantaged 
stakeholders within existing SBM arrangements. The most promising 
innovation within these cases resulted from linking school committees to 
more powerful local actors. This approach lent more authority to school 
17. The following levels of participation are defined in accordance with the modified ‘ladder of participation’ (Arnstein, 
1969), with the next level offering more decision-making power to citizens than the previous one: informing, 
consulting, involving, collaborating, and empowering (see Chapter 2.3). A similar categorization is found in OECD 
(2016: 150).102
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativescommittees in comparison to the usual support tools, and is illustrated by an 
Indonesian case where school committee members are elected democratically 
by the community and linked to village councils through joint planning of 
efforts at the village level to improve teaching and learning. In Peru, to counter 
teachers’ opposition to standardized testing, the government launched a radio 
information campaign with mini soap operas to explain the value of this 
approach to citizens, with a focus on parents. The public support generated 
by the campaign offset the opposition from teachers. 
In El Salvador (EDUCO programme) and Kenya, parents were 
empowered by being awarded hiring and firing capacity over contract 
teachers. In both cases, this provoked significant opposition from tenured 
teachers and powerful teacher unions. This in turn contributed to the 
abolition of EDUCO in 2010 and resulted in significant alterations to the 
initial design of the contract teacher programme in Kenya, with the addition 
of the promise of a tenure track for contract teachers upon their hiring 
(thereby removing a powerful incentive for teacher effort). In India, two 
experimental studies have found that interventions such as increasing 
awareness among VECs of their capacities and engaging parents in assessing 
their children’s school performance result in only minor improvements in 
learning outcomes at best. Contrary to expectations, reading skills most 
improved in cases where volunteers provided outside-of-school training for 
village children. Engagement of VECs also had a minor impact on improving 
some aspects of school performance, such as decreasing absenteeism among 
male teachers from upper castes. At the same time, increased awareness 
among parents of VECs did not result in their increased involvement in 
school management, which, at least in part, may be explained by the perceived 
superiority of teachers, as government employees (often from a higher caste), 
over parents, especially in poor and educationally problematic states 
(Banerjee et al., 2010).
The open policy case of the National Education Plan in Brazil, despite 
its broad coverage, allowed involved experts and civil society only to amend 
the reference document prepared by the government. The case study materials 
did not yield information about any prior consultation or joint drafting of the 
strategy (UNESCO, 2017b ; Pandey, Goyal, and Sundararaman, 2011). 103Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
7.3 Open government dimensions and the policy cycle
This section summarizes surveyed cases based on their OG dimension and 
usage in the policy cycle. As open government aims to make governments 
more responsive to their citizens, analysis of the stages in the policy process 
of an OG initiative may help clarify how these initiatives are able to capture 
citizens’ needs and interests as a basis for accountability. 
According to Y oung and Quinn (2002: 12), the policy cycle consists of 
the following phases: (i) problem definition/agenda setting, (ii) constructing 
the policy alternatives/policy formulation, (iii) choice of solution/selection 
of preferred policy option, (iv) policy design, (v) policy implementation and 
monitoring, and (vi) evaluation. The opportunities for citizens to communicate 
their interest and have their needs considered as part of the policy process are 
usually greater during stages i to iii. During stage iv, governments tend to work 
with experts (if they engage with stakeholders at all), while stages v and vi may 
provide opportunities for citizens to report on how the policy affects them or 
how they perceive its effects.
While not all OG initiatives may be clearly assigned to a policy cycle, 
the identified cases document particularly active applications of OG 
dimensions during the two final stages of the policy cycle: implementation 
and monitoring, and evaluation . These two stages are often blurred within a 
respective OG dimension. For example, data portals with centralized 
information on schools often contain data about disbursed and received 
government funds (implementation) and feedback tools for parents to report 
on the quality of education and school facilities (evaluation). T o date, only 
the cases of Brazil’s National Education Plan and PBNYC engaged 
stakeholders at the stage of choice of policy solutions, while the school meal 
purchasing case in Bogotá engaged stakeholders during the problem definition  
stage. The case of participatory budgeting in Poitou-Charentes provides an 
example of the policy design stage, with citizens involved in developing an 
additional ‘social justice’ criterion for the selection of projects to be funded.104
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesBox 10.  Poitou-Charentes region school participatory budgeting (2005–14)
In 2004, following the victory of a socialist candidate for the post of president of the region, 
a participatory budgeting process was launched for all 93 public schools in Poitou-Charentes. 
The process envisaged the allocation of 10 per cent of the region’s school budget through a 
two-step participatory process involving citizens – including previously excluded groups such 
as pupils and technical staff. During the first round of meetings at the beginning of a school 
year, the school community brainstormed and formulated ideas for the improvement of 
school well-being and the purchase of equipment (construction and complete renovation 
projects were not eligible for participatory budgeting). During the second round of meetings 
the participants voted on the nominated projects. Between the two rounds, project ideas were 
verified for eligibility and feasibility by a dedicated team, the Participatory Democracy 
Department. In 2011, a citizen committee consisting of 1,000 people enhanced the 
participatory budgeting process with ‘social justice’ criteria to ensure that the neediest schools 
received funding. 
The participatory budgeting process resonated within the population. Each meeting gathered 
from 20 to 600 people depending on the size of the school community, with 24,000 people 
participating in total. With a participation rate of 15 per cent of invitees, the participatory 
budgeting process was the most attended in Europe. The process also experienced an increase 
in participation among pupils, rising from 66 per cent in 2005 to 87 per cent in 2007–08.
The resources allocated and used for the participatory budgeting process were as follows:
• The budget for projects was around EUR 10 million annually in 2005–10 and 
EUR 5 million annually in 2011–14.
• The budget for technical staff was approximately EUR 150,000/year.
• The cap on each individual project was EUR 150,000, which on average enabled three 
selected projects to be funded (180 projects in 2010).
Structural and political factors contributed to the emergence of this inclusive process. First, 
following the 2003 constitutional amendment, French regions received additional autonomy 
and responsibilities in the education sector, whereby ca. 25 per cent of the Poitou-Charentes 
budget was allocated to that end.. Furthermore, socialist candidate Ségolène Royal and two 
other members of her campaign team were inspired by the participatory budgeting process 
in Porto Alegre and built their election campaign around ideas of participatory democracy. 
This promise secured them votes in a usually conservative region in 2005 and in 2010, thus 
suggesting that ideas of participatory democracy may be conducive to political capital.105Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector 
In 2011, a new wave of reform in the French regions centralized education management 
once more. In 2014–16, the merger of Poitou-Charentes and two other regions produced a 
larger region, Nouvelle-Aquitaine, for which it was not possible to identify participatory tools 
in education management. The lack of continuity of the participatory budgeting process after 
the regions’ merger may be explained by three factors. First, the process faced resistance from 
school management personnel who felt threatened by the loss of authority in the face of 
inclusive decision-making. Thus, teacher unions were not supportive. Second, the process 
was not institutionalized due to the very limited legislative ability of the regions, so its 
functioning depended heavily on the political will and preferences of the incumbent regional 
presidency. Finally, the cost of the project was covered by the region with the support of EU 
funds, thus the funding priorities changed after the 2015 election cycle and the regional 
merger.
Source:  Hammo and Fletcher (2017); OECD (2009); Participatory Budgeting Project (n.d.); Talpin and Zobel (2011); 
Constitutional Law No. 2003-276, 28 March 2003, on the decentralized organization of the Republic.
One of the reasons for including citizens during the later stages of the 
policy process may be that communities, especially in remote areas, constitute 
the only resource available to governments for monitoring their policies, 
especially in developing countries. Conversely, for these communities, being 
engaged in monitoring governments’ policies may be one of the few 
opportunities to have a voice, and in the case of the education system, increase 
their authority vis-à-vis teachers. Thus, monitoring programmes appear to 
be beneficial for both governments and local communities. At the same time, 
engaging stakeholders during the earlier stages of policy process, such as in 
the open contracting case of Bogotá, is beneficial for governments as well as 
stakeholders, but requires high capacity on the part of those stakeholders. 
7.4 Open contracting and the Bogotá School Feeding 
Programme: An example of an open government process
In Bogotá (Colombia), 800,000 schoolchildren between the ages of 4 and 
18 receive their most nutritious meal of the day at school, paid for by a 
USD  170  million programme implemented city-wide each year. However, 
Colombian school meals programmes are plagued by inefficiency and even 106
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativescorruption: the open bidding procedures are dominated by one bidder, leading 
to inflated prices for school meals compared to the market. Public schools are 
forced to accept such conditions to avoid interruptions in the supply of meals,  
although the food quality is low. Colombia’s public procurement agency, 
Colombia Compra Eficiente (CCE), and the Ministry of Education set out to 
eliminate these malpractices and found enthusiastic support within Bogotá’s 
Secretariat for Education for a new open contracting process.
Beneficiaries of the new OG initiative were identified, notably suppliers 
of food and delivery services, and parents and schools (the clients). T o tackle 
the problem of a virtual monopoly on meal provision, the initiative focused 
on suppliers. The first step was to identify non-participating suppliers. Step 2 
saw OG initiators set, as an objective of public value, timely provision of 
fresh and nutritious meals to schools at market prices. Step 3 focused on the 
use of an open contracting process, based on an existing open procurement 
data portal, as a public value-generating mechanism. 
The short-term outcomes of the open contracting process involved 
transparency and participation targeted at suppliers. As a manifestation of 
the participatory dimension of open government, suppliers were asked about 
obstacles to their participation in the open bidding procedure. Among the 
obstacles, it was reported that the awarding of joint food production and 
delivery contracts, and concerns about bureaucratic procedures and 
corruption risks, worked to exclude specialized food suppliers. Open data 
on previous governmental procurement of food permitted the identification 
of average prices, which were then compared to the prices of the Bogotá 
School Feeding Programme. This resulted in the uncovering of contracts 
with extremely inflated prices as well as suppliers who often engaged in price 
fixing. Bogotá is also the site of a successful intra-governmental partnership 
that brings together two national-level agencies (the Ministry of Education 
and CCE) and one city-level agency (Secretariat for Education).
 107Mapping initiatives conducted in the education sector Figure 7.  The open contracting process within the Bogotá School Feeding Programme, 
according to the working definition of open government
Beneficiaries
ObjectivesOG dimensions and tools as value-generating 
mechanisms:
Open governmental data and open contractingResult
Input Output  (short-term) Outcome (medium-term) Impact
Step 1: Identify 
stakeholders: large  
food suppliers that do  
not participate in  
bidding
 Step 2: Define the type 
of public value as an 
objective: fresh, timely 
school meals at market 
prices
 Step 3: Define 
appropriate value-
generating 
mechanisms: open 
contractingTransparency:
Open data on 
government  
procurement (CCE)Citizen participation and 
collaboration:
• Supplier engagement
• Supplier sourcing
• Intra-governmental 
partneringImproved public services:
Effectiveness: larger choice 
of suppliers enables choice 
of higher quality for each 
food item Efficiency: 
quadrupled number of 
suppliers; 10–15% of 
savings on cost of food
Public re-use:
Feedback platform for 
parents on quality of school 
meals
Good governance:
Uncovered price fixing; 
owing to the open process, 
more companies dare to 
participate in biddingPublic value: 
98% of standard 
in quality of 
school meals
Accountability:
• Internal audit of 
contracts by CCE
• Social accountability via 
media attention to priceResponsiveness :
Officials are supportive of 
reform: the change was 
initiated by governmental 
agencies (CCE, Ministry 
of Education, and Bogotá 
Education Secretariat)
Source: Authors.108
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesAs a medium-term outcome, the open contracting process resulted in 
improved school meals services in several dimensions. First, the contracting 
process was separated into food supply and food delivery, thereby cutting 
out intermediaries who previously charged service fees for undertaking both 
tasks. This change resulted in efficiency gains, with annual savings of 10–15 
per cent on programme costs due to increased competition as the number 
of suppliers quadrupled. Second, framework contracts with several suppliers 
of one food item established capped prices for a year, and purchase order 
bidding took place between these suppliers as needed. This increased 
effectiveness: owing to the reduction in suppliers’ bargaining power, the 
education secretariat could select suppliers to ensure higher quality of food. 
The open contracting process also resulted in public re-use of procurement 
and meals data. Several NGOs developed an online tool that publishes the 
daily meals served in schools and includes a feedback mechanism for parents 
to complain in the event that meals do not meet the required standard. Finally, 
the new process uncovered price fixing among a few fruit suppliers, making 
possible gains in good governance. An investigation undertaken by a 
competitive oversight agency, the Superintendency for Industry and 
Commerce (SIC), resulted in charges being brought against those companies.
Finally, the case of open contracting in Bogotá had a significant impact. 
According to the national assessment, the subsequent quality of school meals 
in Bogotá reached 98 per cent of the established standard (see Figure 7). 109
Chapter 8
Analysis of major context-specific patterns in 
open government in education
This chapter analyses OG principles, dimensions, and mechanisms with 
reference to the specific contexts of corruption in which they are embedded. 
It bases its analysis on two contexts, referred to earlier: ‘Context A’ describes 
countries where corruption is generally considered an exception within a 
functioning public sector; ‘Context B’ describes countries where corruption, 
including embezzlement of public funds and nepotism, is endemic within the 
public sector and has its roots in domestic societies. This chapter measures 
the context of corruption using T ransparency International’s CPI (2018): 
countries that score higher than 50 points on the CPI belong to Context A, 
while those that score lower than 40 points belong to Context B (see Annex 2 ). 
Out of the surveyed cases, the following eight countries belong to 
Context A: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Lithuania, Slovenia, the UK, 
and the USA. Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Kenya, 
Mexico, Moldova, Nepal, Niger, Pakistan, Peru, Paraguay, the Philippines, 
T anzania, Uganda, and Ukraine are referred to as Context B countries.
8.1 T argeted principles and primary mechanisms of open 
government
As noted earlier, Context  A is conducive to internal and horizontal 
accountability of the education system (see Chapter 5.2). Internal ministerial 
processes are aligned to ensure accountability within the structures of the 
respective ministry, parliamentary oversight executes meaningful control over 
the ministry of education, and a functioning and independent judiciary can 
resolve conflicts within the domain of the rule of law. Under such a system, 
there may not be a need for additional public control, as this would duplicate 
the functions of existing accountability mechanisms. This point is illustrated 110
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesby the case of Australia, where policy officers stated that no discussions 
were held with school principals on school performance based upon the 
online portal ‘My School’ , and by the state of Virginia, where sanctions for 
low performance of schools were issued directly by educational officials to 
schools without any link to citizen engagement. Hence, accountability does 
not seem to be the major targeted outcome of open government in contexts 
where corruption is an exception (indeed, as T able 10 demonstrates, none of 
the cases in Context A target ‘ Accountability’). 
Context B, on the contrary, disables many internal control mechanisms 
and substantially weakens horizontal accountability (Reinikka and Svensson, 
2005: 5). By engaging in corrupt practices within and beyond their sectors 
(whether through the embezzlement of funds or the employment of 
relatives), public officials and educators remove any incentives for internal 
oversight. Moreover, in countries with endemic corruption, parliamentary 
and judiciary branches of power tend to be involved in corrupt networks 
(Fisun, 2012; Johnston, 2014), which complicates horizontal accountability. 
This point is illustrated by the numerous cases of participatory monitoring 
of textbook delivery, teacher attendance, school construction, and quality of 
school meals which prevail among the surveyed cases in Context B countries 
(including the Philippines’ textbook procurement process, the mobile phone 
panel in T anzania, and school committees in provinces of India, Indonesia, 
and Kenya). Thus, OG initiatives aim to increase the accountability of public 
authorities via some form of external control or monitoring, such as through 
social audits (see the cases under Context  B for the OG principle of 
‘ Accountability’ in T able 10). 
While Context A is conducive to accountability in the educational 
sector, its systems of accountability function within the structures of 
representative democracy. Representative democracy, however, has been 
critiqued by citizens and academics alike for its lack of responsiveness 
(Alonso, 2015; Canovan, 1999; Foa and Mounk, 2017; Follesdal and Hix, 
2006; T ormey, 2014), such that countries have started looking for new ways 
to collect information on citizens’ needs and demands between elections 
(Quittkat, 2013). This may explain why, among the reviewed cases, the most 
powerful initiatives that gather data on interests and needs from (school) 111Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open government in education
communities come from developed democracies (Canada, France, and the 
USA). Indeed, both participatory budgeting processes focus on the inclusion 
of previously marginalized groups (pupils and parents in Poitou-Charentes 
and various types of minorities in New Y ork City) in order to collect 
meaningful information on the needs and demands of the targeted 
populations. In Alberta (Canada), inputs from secondary and high school 
pupils feed into policy-relevant decisions via the formal Education Minister’s 
Y outh Council. At the same time, lack of existing accountability mechanisms 
in Context B cases may explain why they predominantly deal with the 
monitoring of educational policy implementation.
T o summarize, governments in Context A countries usually possess the 
capacity to implement and control implementation of their decisions, while 
governments in Context B countries lack this capacity, for reasons including 
systemic corruption, and need external support. At the same time, the larger 
political issue of democratic legitimacy in Context A forces governments to 
look for tools to increase input from citizens. As a result of the interplay of 
these two conditions, Context A becomes more conducive to OG initiatives 
that communicate citizen interests, while in Context B, OG initiatives are 
more focused on controlling and evaluating the implementation of a 
government’s education policy. T able 10 summarizes the clustering of cases 
based on their focus in the policy cycle and context-specific preferences 
categorized by a relevant OG principle.
8.2 Short-term outcomes of open government
Transparency
In both Contexts A and B, initiatives targeting transparency are active during 
the policy implementation phase (see ‘T ransparency’ in T able 10), publishing 
data on school performance and (sometimes) governmental spending. In 
Context A, the primary goal of such initiatives seems to be allowing parents to 
make informed choices regarding school selection (e.g. the ‘My School’ portal 
in Australia and the GCSE Guide in the UK). Two other cases of transparency 
in policy implementation exemplify this approach: the Virginia SRC system 
and São Paolo’s extension of the national standard progress evaluation system. 112
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesT able 10. Context-specific features of surveyed cases and initiatives and focus  
in the policy cycle
Focus in the policy 
cycle: communication 
of interests/policy 
implementationShort-term 
outcomesContext A (corruption 
as an exception)
CPI > 50Context B (corruption  
as the norm)
CPI <=40
Communication of 
interests: needs  
and demands of clients 
(children and parents) 
or suppliersParticipation Participatory budgeting with a 
strong deliberative component and 
large budgets, focus on the inclusion 
of marginalized groups (Poitou-
Charentes, France; New York City, USA)
Crowdsourcing (Lithuania)Policy sourcing from relatively privileged 
groups (suppliers, experts) (Colombia, Brazil)
Participatory budgeting with weak deliberation 
(Ukraine, Moldova)
Policy 
implementation: 
teacher and pupil 
attendance, school 
infrastructure, services, 
(e.g. meals, textbooks), 
learning achievementTransparency Open data portals (Australia, 
Virginia and New York City [US])
Data re-use (UK)Cases of transparency of information on 
school performance (Moldova, Pakistan, Peru, 
São Paulo [Brazil], Tanzania, Uganda)
Data re-use (Paraguay)
Participation Usage of open data in the school 
curriculum (Moers, Germany)Social audits with a strong participatory 
component, including offline and online 
channels (Philippines)
Accountability No cases found Usage of information from online tools against 
the embezzlement of funds and teachers’ 
absenteeism at the policy level (Mexico)
Tackling accountability of individual 
teachers by empowering SBM institutions 
(EDUCO (El Salvador), [El Salvador], VECs 
[India], Extra Teacher Programme [Kenya])
Allocation of funds by government based on social 
audits of schools (Nepal)
Source: Authors.113Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open government in education
In both cases, accountability is not linked to the dissemination of information 
to a wider public or the participation of citizens, and instead relies on internal 
mechanisms. In Virginia, negative results of school assessments (obtained 
via standardized tests and using the Department of Education’s own data 
collection process) may lead to loss of accreditation for a school. In São 
Paolo, teacher bonuses are linked to the school’s progress towards the city’s 
educational targets. 
The primary goal for Context B (and the secondary goal for Context A 
cases) is supplying information to the public in the hope that parents or wider 
civil society will hold individual schools or the ministry of education to account. 
Conversely, in the Punjab province of Pakistan, while SRCs are collected and 
published online and displayed in schools, there seem to be no apparent 
consequences for low-performing schools. Somewhat differently from these 
cases, in the UK a media outlet (The Guardian ) and an NGO re-used open 
data on school funding and learning achievement to rank schools and visualize 
the results in an easy-to-understand format. Only anecdotal evidence exists, 
however, to indicate that parents used this tool to choose schools for their 
children (market-based accountability).
Participation in the communication of interests
Logically, the short-term outcome of OG initiatives directed at the 
communication of interests would be participation – in both contexts. At 
the same time, cases may be differentiated by the profiles of participants 
and the magnitude of their participation (see ‘Communication of interests’ 
in T able 10). While in Alberta (Canada), Lithuania, New Y ork City (USA), 
Poitou-Charentes (France), and Slovenia (Context  A), participatory 
mechanisms for policy formulation (e.g. participatory budgets and forums 
in the case of Lithuania, and the Minister’s Y outh Council in Alberta) 
are directed at ‘average’ community members (e.g.  teachers, parents, and 
pupils), in Brazil and Colombia (Context B), the audience for participation is 
professionals. In Bogotá input was sought from retailers and food producers, 
and in Brazil from educational experts and, to a lesser extent, teachers. In 
the case of Moldova, input was sought from community members, but only 
at the school level. The case of participatory budgeting in Lviv (Ukraine, 114
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesContext  B) is particularly notable. Using the online voting platform (at 
home or at public service centres), some 72,000 citizens (12 per cent of the 
Lviv population with voting rights) voted for citizen-driven projects, most 
of which concerned school and kindergarten infrastructure. This process, 
however, was influenced by the specificity of the context. Unlike France or 
the USA, some members of the City Council authored winning projects 
and exerted pressure on voters through organized voting at public service 
centres and influenced parents to vote. 
Participation in policy implementation
Cases that include citizen participation in monitoring policy implementation 
are mostly relevant for the Context  B countries (see ‘Participation’ in 
the ‘Policy implementation’ section of T able  10). In contexts of systemic 
corruption, the participation of citizens may be used as an external 
monitoring tool when there is no state capacity to conduct independent 
monitoring. Another consideration is that as final users, citizens will be in a 
better position to assess the quality of services. Examples of such initiatives 
include: ‘Checkmyschool’ , the National T extbook Delivery Programme and 
school-building monitoring from the Philippines, and the mobile phone 
user panel on quality of services in T anzania.
Accountability
Cases that demonstrate opportunities for accountability with regard to 
the implementation of educational policy are all drawn from Context  B. 
Although examples are often related to the school level through various 
manifestations of SBM, there is also room for accountability at the policy 
level. At the school level, accountability is often implemented by linking 
school committees’ monitoring of teacher attendance to teacher salaries 
or even retention. In the case of the Kenyan school committees and El 
Salvador’s EDUCO programme, parent-led school committees were able 
to hire and dismiss non-civil servant teachers (‘contract teachers’). In the 
case of Nepal, social audits of schools – conducted annually by the school 
auditing committee and consisting of representatives and nominees of a 115Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open government in education
parent–teacher association, a community leader, a teacher, and two pupil 
representatives – have had an impact on the distribution of school budgets 
by the District Education Officer. 
At the policy level, the case of the ‘Improve Y our School’ online platform 
in Mexico is informative. Built by an NGO, the platform enables users to 
compare available open data on budget allocation against schools with open 
data on electricity connections and reports from citizens on the actual 
number of teachers in schools and the availability of schools and facilities. 
The resulting report uncovered several thousand ‘ghost teachers’ and ‘online 
schools’ in locations with no access to electricity, among other cases of 
corruption. As a result of media attention, the Ministry of Education revised 
its policy on teacher salaries, and school principals acquired greater leverage 
to ensure that local authorities transfer the intended budgets to their schools. 
8.3 Medium-term outcomes of open government
The analysis of medium-term outcomes of surveyed OG initiatives consists 
of assessing whether an initiative resulted in improved public service 
(effectiveness and efficiency), economic and social added value (public 
re-use and results for community engagement), and/or good governance 
(increased trust in government and reduction in corruption [risks]). It is 
important to note that in some of the cases the literature focuses solely 
on how the intervention worked and/or its impact (e.g.  the educational 
attainment of pupils in schools involved in OG experiments), while only 
a small number of case descriptions deal with the full logical chain of 
OG initiatives (see Figure 3 ). A full list of cases and their outcomes (or 
an indication that no outcomes were available) is provided in Annex  5 . 
Excerpts from cases that did produce outcomes are presented in T able 11 
and T able  12. The following analysis structures outcomes based on the 
context-specific logic of OG dimensions. 
Context A
T able  11 shows that that transparency initiatives in Context  A (where 
corruption is an exception) mostly result in market-based accountability. 116
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesOnce they have information on school performance, parents can make 
informed decisions on the choice of school for their children. Furthermore, 
surveyed cases in Australia and the UK indicate that open data is being 
re-used by members of the civil society to create social added value. For 
example, the ‘My School’ platform helped an NGO charity link the neediest 
schools with a local supermarket chain, which provided support to tutor 
indigenous pupils. Similarly, open data in the UK facilitated the creation of 
a school database to enable parents to select schools in their neighbourhood 
on the basis of educational attainment. 
The initiatives that focused on communicating citizens’ interests 
through participation all achieved their main goal. In Poitou-Charentes, 
participation by pupils in the school budgeting process reached 87 per cent, 
while in New Y ork City the 6,000 participants included members of ethnic, 
gender, and language groups usually under-represented during the voting 
process. The case of New Y ork City also showed how participation enabled 
citizens to connect with their peers, as well as with their political 
representatives, thereby improving the chances of policy-making in the public 
interest. The case survey did not report any data on the outcomes of the 
Minister’s Y outh Council in Alberta (Canada). Accordingly, this rare example 
of the institutionalization of pupils’ involvement in policy-making in the 
form of a consulting body deserves further investigation.
Context B
T able  12 shows the medium-term outcomes of selected OG initiatives 
in Context  B (where corruption is the norm). Only a few participatory 
initiatives targeted communication of interests in Context  B. The case 
of the Bogotá School Feeding Programme (see Figure 7 ) is illustrative of 
the importance of intra-governmental cooperation and commitment in 
ensuring a meaningful participatory approach to creating an OG tool (open 
contracting). In this case, the mid-term outcomes are clearly positive: as 
well as savings for the city budget and increased quality of suppliers due to 
competition, the city administration managed to win the trust of the business 
community as more reputable market players entered the bidding process. 117Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open government in educationT able 11. Outcomes of selected OG initiatives in Context A (corruption as an exception)
Improved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Improvement 
in government 
efficiencyImprovement 
in government 
effectivenessPublic re-use Community results Trust
Australia
‘My School’ 
websiteMore information 
became available for 
the fairer distribution 
of resourcesNo outcome 
for horizontal 
accountabilityIdentification of 
charity recipientsConversations were 
initiated among school 
principals and parentsSchool principals more 
openly and accurately 
share information on 
educational attainment, but 
some perceived increased 
competition between schools 
and increased information to 
parents as negative
France
Poitou-
Charentes 
region School 
District 
Participatory 
BudgetingModernization 
of the regional 
administration, 
reinforcing 
transversality and 
dialogue between 
departments and 
accelerating decision-
making processesFaster response to 
users’ expectations; in 
2011, concerns about 
distribution inequality 
resulted in people-
elaborated social 
justice criteria to 
make sure the neediest 
schools benefitIncreased participation 
of pupils from 66% in 
2005 to 87% in 2007–08 
(OECD, 2009)In some cases, there was 
strong opposition on the 
part of head-teachers and 
teacher unions who felt that 
their authority was being 
undermined. Other schools 
reported better collaboration 
between government and 
community stakeholders118
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiatives
Improved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Improvement 
in government 
efficiencyImprovement 
in government 
effectivenessPublic re-use Community results Trust
USA
PBNYCThe NYCSCA has 
implemented ca. 50 
projects since 2012, 
with ca. 400 projects 
pending (largest 
amount in both 
categories). Speed is 
not satisfactory (slow)The involvement of 
non-voters: including 
youth, immigrants, 
non-English speakers 
(e.g. Bangladeshi 
community), and 
low-income, racially/
ethnically diverse 
participants. Participants 
established social ties 
to other community 
members via joint work 
on projectsBetter relations with City 
Council members, and 
citizens felt more comfortable 
contacting government
Source: Authors.119Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open government in educationT able 12. Outcomes of selected open government initiatives in Context B  
(corruption as the norm)
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement 
in government 
efficiency 
(resources)Improvement 
in government 
effectiveness 
(goals)Public re-use Community  
resultsTrust Reduction of 
corruption risks
Parent-
empowerment 
initiatives in 
El Salvador 
(EDUCO), Kenya 
(Extra Teacher 
Programme), 
India (VECs), and 
school committees 
(Indonesia, 
Niger).
Indonesia: 
linkage with village 
councilsShort-term, higher 
expenses than non-
SBM, but long-term 
equalization of 
student advancement 
costs; nuanced 
increase in teacher 
attendance 
(e.g. ‘problematic’ 
groups increase 
effort).Controversial: 
SBM mitigates the 
adverse effects of 
parallel-funded 
teacher programmes 
(Kenya), but there is 
no impact if parents 
lack authority/
associational 
experience (Niger).Increased 
participation of 
community members. 
More meetings take 
place with more 
members present
BUT: their 
participation varies 
according to socio-
economic and literacy 
indicators.Conflict between 
parents and 
teachers (parents 
feel disempowered 
or disadvantaged 
compared to tenure-
track teachers 
– EDUCO, Extra 
Teacher Programme), 
except in one-teacher 
schools.
Importance of the 
legitimacy of SBM-
committees through 
elections (Indonesia).Kenya: SBM schools 
hired less relatives of 
tenure-track teachers 
for the Extra Teacher 
Programme.
Mexico
Improve Your 
SchoolBetter use of resources 
for teacher salaries. 
Parents used the 
platform to prove 
cases of absenteeism, 
resulting in the firing 
of teachers.Anecdotal: parents 
feel more empowered 
vis-à-vis teachers 
when they have access 
to information.Competent school 
principals benefited 
from knowing about 
schools’ and parents’ 
engagement.Data made possible 
publication of the 
corruption report. 
Ten states initiated 
audits, and teacher 
payrolls are now being 
funded by the federal 
government instead of 
state governments.120
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiatives
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement 
in government 
efficiency 
(resources)Improvement 
in government 
effectiveness 
(goals)Public re-use Community  
resultsTrust Reduction of 
corruption risks
Paraguay
Ciudad del Este 
municipality use 
of open data to 
monitor school 
fundingPrior to the open data 
portal, such studies 
cost USD 2 600 for 
the NGO and took 8 
months. In 2017, the 
study took 2 weeks 
and cost USD 200–
300.Open data on school 
funding is used by an 
NGO to monitor local 
funds.There seems to be a 
lack of follow-up on 
the part of government 
to end impunity when 
information on the 
mismanagement 
of funds becomes 
available.
Philippines
National 
Textbook Delivery 
Programme Savings of 
USD 1.4 million, 
reduction in the 
average cost of 
textbooks by 40%, 
bidding time 
reduction from 24 to 
12 months (G-Watch, 
2015)Improvement in the 
quality of textbooks 
(suppliers were 
concerned with not 
getting the bid the 
following year if the 
reported quality was 
poor).Community 
participation in 
monitoring textbook 
delivery fostered by 
local NGOs.Order No. 59, 
‘Institutionalising 
NGO and Private 
Sector Participation 
in the Department’s 
Procurement Process’, 
institutionalized 
state–society 
collaboration.Complaint mechanism 
ensured that low-
quality providers 
would not be invited to 
submit bids next time.
Ukraine
Lviv Participatory 
BudgetHalf of the projects 
from 2016 were not 
implemented in 2017 
(although they ought 
to have been).Participatory 
budgeting was 
designed to attract 
community space-
related/creative 
projects, but due to 
school engagement, 
these are mostly 
infrastructure-related.The abundance 
of school and 
kindergarten 
infrastructure projects 
caused tensions 
between these projects 
and ‘non-education’ 
projects.Some City Council 
members authored 
projects and mobilized 
voters. This gave 
rise to the negative 
perception that they 
were motivated by 
political gain.Multiple cases of 
organized voting 
pressure exerted on 
parents and teachers 
were observed (signs 
of corruption/fraud at 
elections).
Source: Authors.121Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open government in educationMedium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement 
in government 
efficiency 
(resources)Improvement 
in government 
effectiveness 
(goals)Public re-use Community  
resultsTrust Reduction of 
corruption risks
Paraguay
Ciudad del Este 
municipality use 
of open data to 
monitor school 
fundingPrior to the open data 
portal, such studies 
cost USD 2 600 for 
the NGO and took 8 
months. In 2017, the 
study took 2 weeks 
and cost USD 200–
300.Open data on school 
funding is used by an 
NGO to monitor local 
funds.There seems to be a 
lack of follow-up on 
the part of government 
to end impunity when 
information on the 
mismanagement 
of funds becomes 
available.
Philippines
National 
Textbook Delivery 
Programme Savings of 
USD 1.4 million, 
reduction in the 
average cost of 
textbooks by 40%, 
bidding time 
reduction from 24 to 
12 months (G-Watch, 
2015)Improvement in the 
quality of textbooks 
(suppliers were 
concerned with not 
getting the bid the 
following year if the 
reported quality was 
poor).Community 
participation in 
monitoring textbook 
delivery fostered by 
local NGOs.Order No. 59, 
‘Institutionalising 
NGO and Private 
Sector Participation 
in the Department’s 
Procurement Process’, 
institutionalized 
state–society 
collaboration.Complaint mechanism 
ensured that low-
quality providers 
would not be invited to 
submit bids next time.
Ukraine
Lviv Participatory 
BudgetHalf of the projects 
from 2016 were not 
implemented in 2017 
(although they ought 
to have been).Participatory 
budgeting was 
designed to attract 
community space-
related/creative 
projects, but due to 
school engagement, 
these are mostly 
infrastructure-related.The abundance 
of school and 
kindergarten 
infrastructure projects 
caused tensions 
between these projects 
and ‘non-education’ 
projects.Some City Council 
members authored 
projects and mobilized 
voters. This gave 
rise to the negative 
perception that they 
were motivated by 
political gain.Multiple cases of 
organized voting 
pressure exerted on 
parents and teachers 
were observed (signs 
of corruption/fraud at 
elections).
Source: Authors.Conversely, the mid-term outcomes in the case of the Lviv participatory 
budget (Ukraine) are less positive. While it enjoyed a high level of citizen 
participation, instances of unfair voting and political rent-seeking came to 
the fore during the third year of the initiative. In particular, the absence of 
restrictions on the ‘authors’ of initiatives enabled schools (as legal entities) 
and members of the City Council to submit projects. Participation by 
members of the City Council as authors was criticized as inappropriate, on 
the grounds that the participatory budget process was being exploited for 
political gain. Participants in the open budget and some commentators also 
criticized schools and kindergartens for mobilizing votes from stakeholders 
(including by exerting pressure on parents). 
Where cases targeted transparency to increase accountability during 
policy implementation, only a few reports were able to confirm that the 
respective tools were used by parents and civil society as intended. Such cases 
include open data on funding from the National Public Investment and 
Development Fund (FONACIDE) in Paraguay and the publication of 
information on governmental school transfers in local media in Uganda. In 
this regard, the case of Uganda is exemplary. Following the publication of 
information on school transfers in local media, parental indignation ensured 
that the proportion of school transfers that were received as intended increased 
from 12 per cent (baseline) to 80 per cent (post-intervention). The case of the 
Municipality Ciudad del Este in Paraguay is an example of an NGO re-using 
open data on school funding priorities to verify whether these priorities have 
been implemented as planned. Owing to the use of open data on funding from 
FONACIDE, the NGO spent 10 times less for their monitoring study than 
before the release of the open data platform. 
In Context B, low government capacity is exacerbated by low public 
trust in authorities. Thus, engaging citizens may be a way to improve state–
society relations. Some of the surveyed participation-focused initiatives in 
Context B demonstrate that engaging citizens in monitoring policy 
implementation may indeed be conducive to improvements in the quality 
of governance as a mid-term outcome. The example of the Philippines’ 
textbook procurement and school building programme is illustrative in this 122
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesregard: citizen participation not only helped to tackle corrupt practices in 
procurement and construction and monitor the quality of final products 
(schools and textbooks), but also resulted in the institutionalization of public 
participation in these two processes. Such institutionalization is indicative 
of increasing trust between the government and civil society.
Accountability-focused initiatives that involved the empowerment of 
parents – notably, SBM projects – had conflicting mid-term outcomes. 
Radical empowerment of parents in El Salvador (EDUCO) and Kenya (Extra 
T eacher Programme), or of mixed parent–teacher school committees (India 
and Indonesia), had positive effects on the quality of teaching (reduced 
absenteeism and an increase in effort among affected teachers). The logic 
behind such interventions was to allow parents to manage a special category 
of teachers (‘extra teachers’ or ‘contract teachers’) who lacked the benefits 
of a civil servant (tenure, pension, career prospects), but had to perform to 
a certain standard in order for parents to prolong their contracts. In fewer 
cases, school committees could exert some control over teachers’ salaries. 
However, in all the surveyed cases (except one-teacher schools), such 
empowerment of parents was negatively perceived by teachers as an attempt 
to lower their authority and infringe on their labour rights. The effectiveness 
of these initiatives was further reduced when parents had a lower educational 
level and social status than teachers, which led to conflicts or to teachers 
ignoring school committees. Some case studies (e.g. India and Niger) 
demonstrated that parents often lacked the knowledge to make meaningful 
decisions to increase teaching quality and instead focused on tangible 
improvements to infrastructure. 
In summary, empowering parents at the expense of teachers resulted 
in small, short-term improvements to teacher effort, but had a lasting negative 
effect on teacher–parent relations. This led to the discontinuation or 
considerable reformulation of SBM programmes as soon as this became 
politically viable (see the cases of El Salvador and Kenya, for example).123Analysis of major context-specific patterns in open government in education
T able 13.  Summary of the recorded impacts of surveyed open 
government initiatives
Initiative Impact
India
VECs (control over teacher 
attendance)2005–06: no improvement in school performance, or parental 
involvement in schools, but some improvement occurred in 
reading skills due to volunteer work 
2006–09: improvement in learning outcomes in maths, but not in 
language (due to teaching skills and maybe too little time)
Bogotá School Feeding 
Programme 
Open contractingQuality of meals reached 98% of the set government standard 
(one of the highest in Colombia)
Indonesia
School committees: elections 
of members, connecting 
school committees to village 
councils (linkage)Linkage and linkage plus elections improved learning outcomes 
to a greater extent than block grants and training. In-kind 
contributions did not improve learning outcomes. Raising 
awareness of committees (via elections) did not result in better 
learning outcomes, and increasing financial support did not 
result in improvement
Kenya
Extra Teacher Programme, 
Western Province (with and 
without school committees – 
SBM/non-SBM)Increase in pupils’ performance (standardized tests took place 
after the programme finished in November 2006)
El Salvador
EDUCO389 000 schoolchildren who would otherwise have been out of 
school received basic and elementary education (during 2004–09, 
high school education was also included in the programme)
Source: Authors.
8.4 Impacts of open government initiatives
Following the working definition of open government provided under 
Chapter 5, attention was paid to any evidence of the impact of the surveyed 
cases on public value related to education, such as learning outcomes 
and nutrition (as a part of ensuring equal opportunities for educational 
attainment for poor pupils). Surprisingly, very few of the case sources 
described attained long-lasting impacts (see T able 13). 124
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesT o summarize, the short- and medium-term outcomes of OG initiatives 
are affected by the corruption context in which they are embedded. In 
countries with systemic corruption, initiatives that render the policy 
implementation process open to public scrutiny, or empower new 
stakeholders at the school level, are prevalent. In some cases, positive impact 
on some learning indicators have been observed. In general, the public 
administration works well where open government aims to source needs 
and ideas from education stakeholders or to publicize information to induce 
market-based accountability.125
Conclusion
The aim of this publication is to help close the knowledge gap relating to 
the following question: How does open government affect the education sector? 
T o answer this question, the review first presents a systematic analysis of 
diverse OG definitions in order to clarify the conceptual confusion around 
the term ‘open government’ , and then provides a working definition of open 
government in general and for the education sector in particular. Thereafter, 
the review maps out and assesses the contextual specifics of 34 diverse and 
recent OG initiatives in education worldwide. 
An analysis of definitions demonstrates that, at its core, open 
government consists of three interwoven components: transparency , citizen 
participation  and collaboration , and accountability and responsiveness. Open 
government is often used as an umbrella term for different mechanisms that 
are applied to fulfil the functions of transparency, citizen participation, and 
accountability. It is also a dynamic process that serves as a tool to reach pre-
determined targets. Any impact evaluation therefore depends on the interests 
of the main stakeholders defined at the beginning of the OG process. Risks 
and challenges to the success of open government arise if the development 
of separate OG components, especially transparency in the form of open 
data, becomes the sole objective. Any successful OG process thus relies on 
the short-term outcomes of transparency, participation, and accountability 
in order to achieve long-term impacts. 
In this review, open government is conceptualized as a principal-centred 
process of governance that aims to create public value through partnership 
between public authorities and citizens. The term ‘partnership’ is defined 
here as including citizen participation and collaboration, which are impossible 
without meaningful transparency and are only effective under conditions 
where accountability and government responsiveness are in place. ‘Public 
value’ , as the main objective of open government, implies that a group of 
beneficiaries from among the general public must be identified at the 126
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativesbeginning of the OG process. The long-term objectives are then set, taking 
into account the needs of the major stakeholders. On the basis of these 
objectives and an analysis of stakeholders (including their skills and 
possibilities for cooperation), the process selects the appropriate OG 
mechanisms and necessary components and dimensions to generate public 
value. According to the working definition, open government in education 
is a process of governance, based on the principle of ‘the best interests of the 
child’ , that aims to ensure inclusive, equitable, high-quality education for all 
through partnerships between the main stakeholders in the education system.
Mapping of OG dimensions across six world regions has demonstrated 
that the national level remains the most relevant for policy-making in the 
education sector. At the same time, subnational and city-level initiatives have 
become increasingly popular, with some initiatives operating as extensions 
of national programmes, while others are developed specifically for 
subnational units. The analysis of the mapped cases suggests that the choice 
of OG dimensions and targeted principles is context-specific. In countries 
with occasional corruption, open government is mostly used to meet 
stakeholders’ education-related needs; however, in countries with systemic 
corruption, participatory initiatives often target the implementation or 
monitoring of a policy. 
While OG planning involves governments, NGOs, grass-roots CSOs, 
local self-government, business, international donors, and affected groups 
(who may not be organized), the most complex and sustainable projects are 
led by governments, even if they are designed and promoted by NGOs (as 
is the case in the Philippines and El Salvador). This is reflective of the high 
level of centralization in the educational sector. However, in the most 
successful cases, collaboration between governments and CSOs is critical to 
ensure stakeholder mobilization and the implementation of participatory 
tools, such as social audits and SBM. 
Although socio-economic factors may determine opportunities and 
barriers to participation in open government for relevant stakeholders 
(parents, teachers, suppliers of education-related services, school 
administrations), actual growth in participation can be linked to targeted 127Conclusion
awareness-raising and capacity-building efforts, not just for recipients, but 
also for providers of school services and local education officials. 
The design of OG initiatives is crucial. Most OG initiatives target at 
least two of the OG principles, and the most successful cases illustrate the 
importance of all three OG principles working in concert to achieve the 
desired policy outcome and impact. At the design stage, it is vital to make 
sure that initiatives that link accountability to the empowerment of previously 
weak actors (usually parents vis-à-vis teachers in SBM) do not undermine 
the authority of previously powerful education stakeholders. This is because 
perceived loss of authority may lead to conflict instead of cooperation and, 
as in the case of El Salvador, contribute to the closure of programmes.
Open government initiatives able to demonstrate impact shared several 
characteristics in common. First, they involved all relevant stakeholders at 
the design stage. Second, appropriate material resources were allocated for 
the management of the OG process. Third, they understood that the skills 
of both government officials and OG recipients needed to be adequate to 
comprehend the complexity of the tools involved. The proficiency of 
government officials in handling open data is particularly decisive in ensuring 
buy-in from local officials. Therefore, it is crucial to incorporate digital skills 
and open policy (soft) skills into the training curriculum for public officials 
(OECD, 2018c). Similarly, training is necessary to ensure the digital and 
communication proficiency of recipients of OG initiatives – both as a part 
of school education (as the case of Moers suggests) and as a part of the OG 
process (as in the case of committee members in the PBNYC project who 
worked on project conceptualization). 
Further research is needed in two areas. First, there is a need for 
additional investigation of the relationship between the empowerment of 
marginalized groups and trust among education stakeholders. Conflicts and 
mutual distrust may taint the good intentions of OG initiatives if incumbent 
powerful groups (teachers or central governments) perceive the 
empowerment of marginalized groups as weakening their current position. 
Second, further research is needed to measure and understand the impact 
of open government on learning results – the ultimate public value of 128
Open government in education: Clarifying concepts and mapping initiativeseducation. How do more transparency, accountability, and participation 
translate into better knowledge and skills of students? Does open government 
help to prepare students for the new demands of the job market? As open 
government is a resource- and time-intensive process, investing in the right 
tools to achieve the intended impact is crucial.129
Annex 1. Open government definitions
Sources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
Congress of Local and 
Regional Authorities of the 
Council of Europe
Report CG35(2018)14final 
Transparency and open 
government
(Galster, 2018)
Strategy on innovation and 
good governance at local level 
(Council of Europe, 2007: 2–3)Open government is an 
umbrella term for a wide 
range of practices that further 
three key principles, including 
open data initiatives, 
access to information 
laws, political rights, 
whistleblower protections, 
public consultation, and 
engagement processes, among 
many others.
Open governance/open state 
are concepts that extend 
open government to include 
initiatives that target other 
institutions (e.g. business, 
parliament, legal systems).Transparency
Participation
AccountabilityBetter decision-making 
Greater public trust
Reduced corruption
More effective services
Fulfilling 12 principles of good 
governance (Council of Europe 
2007: 2)
1. Fair Conduct of Elections, 
Representation and 
Participation, to ensure real 
possibilities for all citizens 
to have their say in local 
public affairs; 
2. Responsiveness, to ensure 
that the local authority 
meets the legitimate 
expectations and needs of 
citizens; 
3. Efficiency and Effectiveness, 
to ensure that objectives are 
met while making the best 
use of resources; Transparency: 
1. Access to information is 
the legal right for citizens to 
request information from their 
government, which must be 
provided unless it falls under a 
specific exemption in law.
2. Open data is content 
generated by new technologies 
to be freely used, modified, 
and shared by anyone for any 
purpose. 
The six principles of the Open 
Data Charter for the release of 
data are: open by default, timely 
and comprehensive, accessible 
and useable, comparable and 
interoperable, for improved 
governance and citizen 
engagement, and for inclusive 
development and innovation.
3. Records management 
ensures that information 
is accessible, authentic, 
comprehensive, and reliable, and 
therefore underpins both access 
to information and open data.Annexes130
Annexes
Sources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
4. Openness and Transparency, 
to ensure public access to 
information and facilitate 
understanding of how 
local public affairs are 
conducted; 
5. Rule of Law, to ensure 
fairness, impartiality, and 
predictability; 
6. Ethical Conduct, to ensure 
that the public interest is 
put before private ones; 
7. Competence and Capacity, 
to ensure that local 
representatives and officials 
are well able to carry out 
their duties; 
8. Innovation and Openness 
to Change, to ensure that 
benefit is derived from 
new solutions and good 
practices; Participation: 
1. Civic space is the freedom 
and means for individuals and 
organized groups to speak, access 
information, associate, organize, 
and participate in public 
decision-making. 
2. Civic engagement refers 
to proactive engagement by 
government with citizens, civil 
society, and other stakeholder 
groups at any stage of the 
policy cycle. It includes 
informing, consulting, involving, 
collaborating with, and 
empowering citizens.
3. Whistleblower protection 
relates to the protection of 
concerned individuals who raise 
an alarm to stop wrongdoings 
that place fellow human beings 
at risk. Their actions provide 
an opportunity to strengthen 
accountability and bolster the 
fight against corruption and 
mismanagement, both in the 
public and private sectors.131
AnnexesSources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
9. Sustainability and Long-
term Orientation, to take 
the interests of future 
generations into account;
10. Sound Financial 
Management, to ensure 
prudent and productive use 
of public funds; 
11. Human Rights, Cultural 
Diversity and Social 
Cohesion, to ensure that all 
citizens are protected and 
respected and that no one is 
either discriminated against 
or excluded; 
12. Accountability, to ensure 
that local representatives 
and officials take 
responsibility and are 
held responsible for their 
actions. Accountability: 
1. Audits, both internal 
and external, are critical to 
ensuring that public money 
is appropriately collected, 
managed, and spent by local 
government. Social audits 
are conducted by civil society 
in localities by accessing 
information from government, 
engaging with citizens, and 
reviewing the situation on the 
ground.
2. Codes of ethics outline what 
is expected of public servants 
and provide an important basis 
for challenging malpractice 
and corruption in government. 
Codes of ethics need to be 
underpinned by clear procedures 
for complaints, review, and 
sanctions.
3. Scrutiny ensures that 
decision-makers are responsive 
and accountable to residents 
for their decisions. Scrutiny by 
elected representatives is further 
supplemented by scrutiny by 
residents, civil society, and the 
media.132
Annexes
Sources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
EU
Towards faster 
implementation and uptake  
of open government: Final 
report.
(Bremers and Deleu, 2016)Open government refers 
to public administrations 
breaking down existing silos; 
opening up and sharing 
assets; and making data, 
services, and decisions open;
enabling collaboration 
on public service design 
and delivery; increasing 
participative forms of policy-
making.Transparency
Collaboration
ParticipationMore transparent functioning 
of government;
Better policy-making via 
enhanced participation;
Better (digital) public services 
via enhanced collaboration;
Unlocking the economic 
potential of government assets; 
Supporting the overall updating 
of open government.Open engagement involves 
opening up the processes for 
public policy-making to the 
whole of society, including 
civil society, businesses, 
labour unions, and individual 
citizens. Open processes for 
policy-making entail better 
informing society of ongoing 
policy initiatives, conducting 
public consultations of policy 
initiatives, and allowing the 
whole of society to actively 
participate and propose ideas for 
future public policy.
Open services are digital public 
services that can be re-used by 
other public administrations 
or eventually by third parties 
in order to provide value-added 
services via a mechanism of 
service composition. Open 
services necessitate the proper 
design of digital public services. 
The design principles of SOA can 
prove useful in this regard. They 
include: modular, decomposed 
services, interoperability through 
an API, and loose coupling.133
AnnexesSources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
Open assets consist of 
government data, software, 
specifications, and frameworks 
that are open with a view to 
enabling anyone to freely access, 
use, modify, and redistribute 
the content with no or limited 
restrictions such as commercial 
use or financial charges.
OECD
Open government: The global 
context and the way forward. 
(OECD, 2016)
Recommendation of the 
Council on Open Government.
(OECD, 2017)
Modernising government: 
The way forward
(OECD, 2005)2016: Open government 
is a culture of governance 
that promotes the principles 
of transparency, integrity, 
accountability, and 
stakeholder participation in 
support of democracy and 
inclusive growth.
Open State defines a 
situation when the executive, 
legislature, judiciary, 
independent public 
institutions, and all levels of 
government – recognizing 
their respective roles, 
prerogatives, and overall 
independence according 
to their existing legal and 
institutional frameworks – 
collaborate, exploit synergies, 
and share good practices 
and lessons learned among 
themselves and with other 
stakeholders to promote 
transparency, integrity, 
accountability, andTransparency
Integrity
Accountability
Stakeholder 
participation
Three characteristics 
appear to be most 
relevant when describing 
a government as open, 
namely:
Transparency – that 
its actions, and the 
individuals responsible 
for those actions, will 
be exposed to public 
scrutiny and challenge;
Accessibility – that its 
services and information 
on its activities will be 
readily accessible to 
citizens; 
Responsiveness – that 
it will be responsive to 
new ideas, demands, and 
needs.Open government: 
• Builds citizen trust; 
• Contributes to achieving 
different policy outcomes in 
diverse domains, including: 
public sector integrity and 
anti-corruption, public 
sector modernization, civic 
freedom, digital government, 
public procurement, public 
sector innovation, public 
financial management, 
and human resource 
management;
• Contributes to all major 
socio-economic targets. 
• Stakeholder participation:
• Increases government 
accountability;
• Broadens citizens’ 
empowerment and influence 
on decisions;Stakeholder participation 
refers to all the ways in which 
stakeholders can be involved in 
the policy cycle and in service 
design and delivery. These 
include:
Information – an initial level 
of participation characterized 
by a one-way relationship in 
which the government produces 
and delivers information to 
stakeholders. It covers both 
on-demand provision of 
information and ‘proactive’ 
measures by the government to 
disseminate information.
Consultation – a 
more advanced level of 
participation that entails a 
two-way relationship in which 
stakeholders provide feedback to 
the government and vice-versa. 
It is based on a prior definition 
of the issue for which views are 
being sought and requires134
Annexes
Sources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
stakeholder participation, in 
support of democracy and 
inclusive growth.
2005: Open government 
means transparency of 
government actions, 
accessibility of government 
services and information, 
and the responsiveness of 
government to new ideas, 
demands, and needs.• Builds civic capacity;
• Improves the evidence base 
for policy-making;
• Reduces implementation 
costs; 
• Taps wider networks for 
innovation in policy-making 
and service delivery.the provision of relevant 
information, in addition to 
feedback on the outcomes of 
the process.
Engagement – when 
stakeholders are given the 
opportunity and the necessary 
resources (e.g. information, 
data, and digital tools) to 
collaborate during all phases of 
the policy cycle and in service 
design and delivery.
OGP
Open government declaration
(OGP , 2011)
What’s in the OGP subnational 
action plans?
(OGP , 2017)Open government involves: 
• Increasing the availability 
of information about 
governmental activities; 
• Supporting civic 
participation; 
• Implementing the highest 
standards of professional 
integrity in public 
administration. 
• Increasing access to new 
technologies for openness 
and accountability.Transparency
Participation
Accountability
Increased access to new 
technologiesMeet people’s demand for: 
• More openness in 
government;
• Greater civic participation in 
public affairs; 
• More transparent, 
responsive, accountable, and 
effective governments.Open government is 
implemented through Action 
Plans. 
OGP subnational action 
plans seek implementation 
of the core principles in four 
complementary fields:
1. Civic participation 
mobilizes citizens to engage 
in a dialogue on policies and 
provides input and monitoring 
that lead to more responsive, 
innovative, and effective 
governance.
2. Public service delivery 
consists of policies, systems, 
and measures to improve the 
quality and efficiency of public 
service delivery in sectors such 
as education, health, water, and 
security.135
AnnexesSources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
3. Marginalized communities 
involves fostering the inclusion 
of typically excluded populations 
in governing and decision-
making.
4. Technology and innovation 
embraces the importance of 
providing citizens with open 
access to technology, the role 
of new technologies in driving 
innovation, and the importance 
of increasing the capacity of 
citizens to use technology.
USA 
Memorandum on Transparency 
and Open Government, 
from 21 January 2009, 
74 Fed. Reg. 15 
(White House, 2009)
‘Open Government Directive: 
Memorandum for the Heads 
of Executive Departments 
and Agencies.’ White House, 
8 December 2009 (Orszag, 
2009)Open government is defined 
as a system of transparency 
(information disclosure, 
soliciting public feedback), 
public participation 
(increased opportunities 
to participate in policy-
making), and collaboration 
(the use of innovative tools, 
methods, and systems to 
facilitate cooperation among 
government departments, and 
with non-profit organizations, 
businesses, and individuals in 
the private sector).Transparency
Public participation
CollaborationTransparency promotes 
accountability by providing the 
public with information about 
what the government is doing. 
Participation allows members 
of the public to contribute 
ideas and expertise so that their 
government can make policies 
with the benefit of information 
which is widely dispersed in 
society. 
Collaboration improves the 
effectiveness of government by 
encouraging partnerships and 
cooperation within the Federal 
Government, across levels 
of government, and between 
the government and private 
institutions.Transparency necessitates 
timely information disclosure 
in forms that the public can 
readily find and use, the use 
of new technologies to place 
information about government 
operations and decisions online 
and readily available to the 
public, and the soliciting of 
public feedback to identify 
information of greatest use to 
the public.
Participation entails creating 
increased opportunities for 
citizens to participate in policy-
making and to provide their 
government with the benefits 
of their collective expertise and 
information. 136
Annexes
Sources Definition Core principles/ 
characteristicsObjective Components/activities for 
implementation
Collaboration involves using 
innovative tools, methods, and 
systems to facilitate cooperation 
among government departments 
and agencies, and with non-
profit organizations, businesses, 
and individuals in the private 
sector.
World Bank
Open government. Brief
(World Bank, 2015)Citizen-centric governance, 
with openness as a central 
pillarTransparency
Citizen engagement and 
participation
ResponsivenessImproving the use of public 
resources.
Facilitating inclusive decision-
making processes. Transparency: 
• Access to information laws 
• Open data portals
• Open contracting
• Budget transparency portals
Open government impact 
and outcomes: Mapping the 
landscape of ongoing research.
(World Bank, 2016)Increasing trust between 
governments and citizens. 
Governments that are more 
open are better positioned to 
act effectively and efficiently, to 
foster private sector growth, and 
to respond to the true needs of 
all citizens.Citizen engagement and 
participation:
• Social accountability 
mechanisms 
• Beneficiary feedback 
mechanisms 
• Citizen consultations
• PETSs
Responsiveness:
• Accountability institutions 
• Ombuds offices
• Supreme audit institutions
• Grievance redress 
mechanisms137
AnnexesAnnex 2. Corruptions Perception Index (CPI) 
of countries represented in the surveyed cases
CountryCPI score 
2017CPI score 
2016CPI score 
2015CPI score 
2014CPI score 
2013CPI score 
2012
Canada 82 82 83 81 81 84
UK 82 81 81 78 76 74
Germany 81 81 81 79 78 79
Australia 77 79 79 80 81 85
USA 75 74 76 74 73 73
France 70 69 70 69 71 71
Slovenia 61 61 60 58 57 61
Lithuania 59 59 59 58 57 54
Ghana 40 43 47 48 46 45
India 40 40 38 38 36 36
Argentina 39 36 32 34 34 35
Brazil 37 40 38 43 42 43
Colombia 37 37 37 37 36 36
Indonesia 37 37 36 34 32 32
Peru 37 35 36 38 38 38
Tanzania 36 32 30 31 33 35
Philippines 34 35 35 38 36 34
El Salvador 33 36 39 39 38 38
Niger 33 35 34 35 34 33
Pakistan 32 32 30 29 28 27
Nepal 31 29 27 29 31 27
Moldova 31 30 33 35 35 36
Ukraine 30 29 27 26 25 26
Mexico 29 30 31 35 34 34
Paraguay 29 30 27 24 24 25
Kenya 28 26 25 25 27 27
Uganda 26 25 25 26 26 29
Source: T ransparency International (2018).138
AnnexesAnnex 3. Overview of the cases identified through  
an extensive review of the literature (including sources)
Region Country Initiative Time frame Subnational OG dimension OG function Policy cycle stage Source
East Asia 
PacificAustralia My School website 2010– No Open data Inform Implementation 
and monitoringRabinowitz (2018)
Indonesia School committees, treatment checks 2007–08 Yes Open innovation Empower Implementation 
and monitoringPradhan et al. 
(2014)
Philippines Checkmyschool online platform 2011– No Social audit Consult Evaluation Parafina (2018)
Philippines National Textbook Delivery 
Programme2002 No Open contracting Collaborate Implementation 
and monitoringG-Watch (2015: 3); 
OGP (2014: 292)
Philippines School-building monitoring 2005–11 No Social audit Involve Evaluation (Aceron, 2013)
Philippines ‘OpenARMM’ Improving Schools in 
the Autonomous Region of Muslim 
Mindanao2015– Yes Open data Inform Implementation 
and monitoringCuster et al. 
(2016: 42)
Europe 
and 
Central 
AsiaFrance Poitou-Charentes region School 
District Participatory Budgeting 
process2005–14 Yes Open budget Collaborate Policy design OECD (2009: 53); 
Participatory 
Budgeting Project 
(n.d.); Talpin and 
Zobel (2011)
Germany Collaborative open data school project 
in Moers, North-Rhein Westphalia2013– Yes Open data Involve Implementation  
and monitoringEuropean Data 
Portal (n.d.)
Lithuania Lithuania 2030 2015 No Open policy Collaborate Constructing policy 
alternativesOECD (2016: 183)139
AnnexesRegion Country Initiative Time frame Subnational OG dimension OG function Policy cycle stage Source
Europe 
and 
Central 
AsiaMoldova Școala Mea (My School) 2014– No, but 
with local 
consequencesSocial audit Involve Implementation 
and monitoringToderaș (2015); 
Vlad (2016) 
Slovenia Kranjska Gora, youth participatory 
budget, https://obcina.kranjska-gora.
si/dogodek/1655592018 Yes Open budget Collaborate Policy design Rabi č, Miklaužič, 
and Miklič (2017)
Ukraine Lviv participatory budget (strong 
focus on schools/kindergartens)2016– Yes Open budget Empower Constructing policy 
alternativesKrasovska (2017); 
Martyniv (2017)
UK GSCE guide (school database by 
learning outcomes and funding; joint 
project of The Guardian and the NGO 
‘Open Public Services Network’2012–14 No Open data Inform Implementation 
and monitoringAdams (2013)
Latin 
America 
and the 
CaribbeanBrazil São Paulo, extension of the national 
Basic Education Development Index2007– Yes (Elements of) 
social auditInvolve Implementation 
and monitoringCheng and Moses 
(2016: 36)
Brazil Decennial National Education Plan 
(PNE)1997– No Open policy Involve Choice of solution/ 
preferred policy 
optionUNESCO 
(2017b: 28)
Colombia Bogotá School Feeding Programme, 
open contracting2015– Yes Open contracting Consult Problem definition/ 
agenda settingBrown and 
Neumann (2018)
El Salvador EDUCO (Community-Managed 
Schools Programme – ACE: 
Community Education Associations)1990–2010 No Open innovation Empower Implementation 
and monitoringUNESCO, 
(2017b: 57–58); 
Florez et al. (2015)
Mexico Improve Your School 2013– No Social audit N/A (activity 
is not 
initiated by 
government)Policy 
implementation 
and monitoringYoung and Verhulst 
(2016)140
Annexes
Region Country Initiative Time frame Subnational OG dimension OG function Policy cycle stage Source
Latin 
America 
and the 
CaribbeanParaguay Ciudad del Este municipality (use of 
open data to monitor school funding)2017 Yes Open data Inform Policy 
implementation 
and monitoringBrown and 
Neumann (2017)
Peru Standardized testing, promotion of 
parental awareness2006 No  N/A Inform Evaluation OGP (2014: 311)
North 
AmericaCanada Minister’s Youth Council (Alberta 
province)2009– Yes Open policy Involve N/A Student 
Engagement Team 
(n.d.); Alberta 
Government 
(2018: 29)
USA PBNYC 2012– Yes Open budget Empower Problem definition/ 
agenda settingKasdan and Cattell 
(2013); Lerner 
(2018)
USA New York City Open Data Portal 2011– Yes Open contracting Inform Implementation  
and monitoringNYC Open Data 
(2018); Sunlight 
Foundation and 
Open Contracting 
Partnership 
(2016: 19)
USA New York City Comptroller’s Portal Ongoing Yes Open data Inform Implementation  
and monitoringNew York City 
Comptroller’s 
Portal18 
USA Virginia SRC 1997– Yes Open data Inform Policy 
implementation  
and monitoringCheng and Moses 
(2016: 48)
18. Available at: www.openbooknewyork.com.141
AnnexesRegion Country Initiative Time frame Subnational OG dimension OG function Policy cycle stage Source
South  
AsiaIndia VEC, parent–teacher association, 
school development and management 
committee within SSA2001– 
(2006–09 
trial with info 
campaign; 
2005–06 
trial in Uttar 
Pradesh)Yes Open innovation Empower Implementation  
and monitoring(Pandey, Goyal, 
and Sundararaman 
(2011) for 2006–09; 
PEO (2010); 
Banerjee et al. 
(2010) for 2005–06 
Nepal Social audits, assessment in the 
districts of Kaski, Dolakha, and 
Nawalparasi2008–09 Yes Social audit Empower Implementation  
and monitoringKafle, Patel, and 
Agarwal (2012)
Pakistan SRC in Punjab Province 2013– Yes Open data Inform Implementation  
and monitoringKhan (2018)
Sub-
Saharan 
AfricaGhana Open committee hearings 2012 No Open budget Inform Evaluation UNESCO (2017b: 30)
Kenya Extra Teacher Programme, Western 
Province2005–06 Yes Open innovation N/A (activity 
is not 
initiated by 
government)Implementation  
and monitoringDuflo, Dupas, and 
Kremer (2015)
Niger School committee COGES grants 2007–09 No, but 
with local 
consequencesOpen innovation Empower Implementation  
and monitoringBeasley and Huillery 
(2015)
Tanzania Mobile phone panel 2013 No Social audit Consult Evaluation OGP (2014: 308); 
Twaweza (2016)
Tanzania Kigoma-Ujiji transparency in 
education platform2016 Yes Open data Inform Evaluation OGP (2017: 17, 
2018)
Uganda School transfer information in local 
media1995–2001 No Open budget Inform Policy 
implementation  
and monitoringMoynihan (2007)142
AnnexesAnnex 4. Details of online portals with school data
Country Platform Purpose Information Enabling factors 
(structure and context)Challenges Results
Australia ‘My School’,  
www.myschool.
edu.au To provide parents, and 
state and territorial 
authorities with access to 
comparable information 
on school performance.Information on school 
attendance by pupils, 
income (Australian and 
state government funding, 
parental contributions), 
capital expenditure, 
and data on students’ 
academic performance 
in National Assessment 
Program – Literacy and 
Numeracy (NAPLAN) 
tests – a mechanism 
to compare students’ 
performance with schools 
serving similar student 
populations (Index 
of Community Socio-
Educational Advantage 
[ICSEA]).A set of public information 
regulations: Australian 
Commonwealth Freedom 
of Information Act; the 
Education Act 2013; 
the national Education 
Regulation 2013; and the 
Australian Curriculum, 
Assessment and Reporting 
Authority Act 2008 (ACARA 
Act). Responsibility for 
school education rests 
within state and territorial 
authorities.The process partially 
duplicated internal 
accountability between 
school principals and 
District Education Offices.There are no consequences 
for direct accountability 
of school principals to 
Education Offices (this 
passes via ministerial 
chain). However, there 
are positive consequences 
for market accountability, 
with parents consulting 
school performance on ‘My 
School’ before choosing 
a school. Some principals 
became more open about 
sharing information, 
while others perceived 
competition for parents’ 
school choice as negative.
Mexico ‘Mejora tu Escuela’ 
(Improve Your 
School),  
www.
mejoratuescuela.orgTo draw attention to the 
discrepancy between the 
amount of education 
funding (one of the 
highest among OECD 
members) and poor 
education quality due 
to mismanagement and 
corruption (embezzlement 
of funds for teacher 
salaries and schoolCommunity-focused 
content: information 
on intended school 
transfers from the federal 
government, results of 
educational attainment 
(test scores), quantity of 
teachers and admin staff, 
comparison of schools by 
these criteria, and school 
location. No informationThe OGP Action Plan 
for Mexico created 
opportunities for the CSO 
to collaborate with the 
Ministry of Education. 
Active media and parents 
engendered accountability 
via public pressure rather 
than official mechanisms.The CSO-launched 
initiative does not entail 
direct accountability 
mechanisms. The 
powerful teacher trade 
union Sindicato Nacional 
de Trabajadores de la 
Educación influences 
policy, having almost veto 
power (UNESCO, 2017a: 
25).Data enabled the 
production of the 
corruption report. Prior 
to its public release, 10 
states initiated audits, and 
teacher payrolls are now 
being funded by the federal 
government instead 
of state governments. 
‘Ghost schools’ and ‘ghost 
teachers’ were identified143
AnnexesCountry Platform Purpose Information Enabling factors 
(structure and context)Challenges Results
development by education 
officials and managers at 
federal, state, and local 
levels).is available on the budget 
of individual schools. 
Offers the opportunity 
to report on issues with 
transparency and fund 
management, and provides 
suggestions for community 
solutions in this regard. 
Policy-focused content: 
reports on discrepancies 
in funding and policy 
analysis.and funds redistributed 
accordingly. Progressive 
principals are supportive 
of the initiative, because 
they are now aware of 
incoming school transfers. 
Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that parents 
felt empowered vis-à-vis 
principals and teachers 
owing to information, 
and some cases of 
fired teachers due to 
absenteeism were reported.
Moldova ‘Școala Mea’ (My 
School), http://
scoalamea.mdIncrease the accountability 
of individual schools to 
school communities within 
the framework of school 
education reform. The 
online portal is envisaged 
as a transparency 
tool within the wider 
accountability process. It 
forms part of a CSO-led 
and World Bank-funded 
project that includes the 
organization of public 
hearings for school 
budgets, independent 
budget analysis for 
schools, and participatory 
cards for school 
stakeholders. Schools 
apply to be selected for the 
programme.School profiles containing 
budget analysis and the 
results of participatory 
cards.Education Strategy 2020 
+ new Education Code 
(foresees accountability 
as joint decision-
making between school 
administration and the 
school community).Public hearings on school 
budgets were met with 
resistance by school 
managers. 
The implementing 
organization lacked 
knowledge of the work of 
the education sector, while 
the Ministry of Education 
was engaged only as 
a partner. This led on 
occasion to resistance and 
miscommunication within 
Ministry structures.Municipal responses: 
In Ungheni district, 
the Council allocated 
MDL 40 000 to each 
beneficiary school to co-
finance priorities identified 
during public hearings. 
At the public hearing held 
at the gymnasium from 
Falestii Noi, the mayor 
promised to contribute to 
the repair of the heating 
system of the school. 
Community results: 
after one year among 
participating schools 
(40), greater trust of 
school managers among 
communities was observed 
and communities144
Annexes
Country Platform Purpose Information Enabling factors 
(structure and context)Challenges Results
became more involved 
(e.g. through in-kind 
contributions for 
extracurricular activities). 
Structural results: the 
emergence of a central 
and accessible open 
data system on school 
education (albeit not 
covering 100% of public 
schools).
Pakistan SRC in Punjab 
Province, http://
pesrp.edu.pk/
home#distranking Increase the accountability 
of schools within the 
Punjab province and the 
internal structures of the 
Department of Education, 
and ensure higher 
transparency towards 
parents.The website contains 
aggregated data for 
schools at the district 
level, including: student 
attendance, teacher 
presence, enrolment by 
gender, results of national 
and provincial proficiency 
tests, and schools’ non-
salary budget (but no 
information on spending). 
Data are updated semi-
annually. Offline report 
cards are available for 
each school in the form 
of a poster that schools 
are encouraged to display 
publicly.The Punjab Education 
Sector Reform Programme 
(PESRP). Specialized 
monitoring department 
– the Programme 
Monitoring and 
Implementation Unit – 
sends its own personnel 
to monitor schools and 
collect data on a monthly 
basis. There are no consequences 
attached to the results 
of the report cards and 
to the requirement to 
publish them at schools; 
therefore, this process 
has not brought tangible 
improvement to schools’ 
performance.Report cards are available 
for each of the 54,000 
schools in 36 districts 
offline, while aggregated 
data are available for each 
district online. There is no 
evidence of governmental 
action on the results of 
SRCs.145
AnnexesCountry Platform Purpose Information Enabling factors 
(structure and context)Challenges Results
Philippines ‘Checkmyschool’, 
www.checkmyschool.
org/ The portal is a part 
of a wider move to 
tackle corruption and 
mismanagement within 
the public school system 
and to increase the quality 
of education. It uses 
participatory monitoring 
to validate the delivery of 
government educational 
services, report on issues, 
and offer solutions that 
communities can take 
themselves.Information on 
governmental transfers 
to schools, meal plans, 
and planned textbook 
arrivals. The portal 
contains feedback forms 
to report on failures 
in infrastructure or 
mismanagement of funds.Wider reforms in 
education sector to tackle 
corruption and citizens’ 
generally high readiness to 
participate in community 
engagement, which 
simplifies the finding of 
volunteers to monitor the 
situation at schools.Not specified. Detailed analyses were not 
identified, but anecdotal 
evidence points to 
improvements in nutrition 
and school infrastructure 
due to increased parental 
monitoring and feedback 
to the Ministry of 
Education.
USA Virginia SRC, http://
schoolquality.
virginia.gov Increase the quality of 
school education in the 
state and adherence to the 
federal requirements for 
school accreditation.Information on enrolment, 
on-time graduation rates, 
results of proficiency tests, 
the student–teacher ratio, 
and per-pupil spending 
– per state, division, and 
individual school.Federal requirement 
for accreditation and 
attention paid by the 
Virginia General Assembly 
to the education sector.Not specified. There are direct 
consequences connected 
to the results of the report 
cards: failure to comply 
with state and federal 
requirements leads to 
a loss of accreditation 
and requires the school 
to inform parents about 
its actions to regain 
accreditation.146
AnnexesAnnex 5. Summary table of available information  
on the medium-term outcomes of the OG initiatives identified
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Context A
Australia
‘My School’ 
websiteMore information became 
available for the fairer 
distribution of resources.The tool seems not to influence 
internal accountability.Parents make more informed 
choices; the tool launched 
conversations among parents, 
community stakeholder groups, 
and teachers and school leaders; 
information on the neediest 
schools made engaging non-
government donors easier (e.g. a 
local food chain supported 
tutoring for indigenous pupils).Principals more openly and accurately 
share information on educational 
attainment, but some perceived 
increased competition between schools 
and increased information to parents 
as negative.
Canada
Minister’s Youth  
Council  
(Alberta)Potentially, more responsive curriculum and legislation, but no data are available on how student engagement affected these areas or how empowered the students felt. 
This area deserves further research.147
AnnexesMedium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
France
Poitou-
Charentes region 
School District 
participatory 
budgeting 
processModernization of the  
regional administration, 
reinforcing transversality and 
dialogue between departments 
and accelerating decision-
making processes.Faster response to users’ 
expectations. In 2011, concerns 
about distribution inequality 
resulted in the elaboration of 
social justice criteria to ensure 
that the neediest schools 
benefit.Increased 
participation of 
pupils from 66% 
in 2005 to 87% in 
2007–08 (OECD, 
2009).Strong opposition 
of head-teachers 
and trade unions 
who felt that their 
authority was being 
undermined.
Germany
Collaborative 
open data school 
project in Moers, 
North Rhine-
WestphaliaStudents 
reportedly learned 
more about their 
government.
Lithuania 2030 No data on outcomes.
Slovenia
Kranjska 
Gora, youth 
participatory 
budget,  
https://obcina.
kranjska-gora.si/
dogodek/165559No data on outcomes.148
AnnexesMedium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
UK
GCSE open data 
re-use caseAnecdotal evidence that 
parents can make more 
informed school choices.Existing open data on school 
performance and funding 
available on the governmental 
portal was re-used by the media 
(The Guardian) and NGO ‘Open 
Public Services Network’ to create 
a database for comparing school 
performance, progress, and pro-
pupil spending.
USA
PBNYCThe NYCSCA has implemented 
ca. 50 projects since 2012, with 
ca. 400 projects pending. Speed 
is not satisfactory (slow).The involvement 
of non-voters, 
including: youth, 
immigrants, non-
English speakers 
(e.g. Bangladeshi 
community), 
and low-income, 
racially/
ethnically diverse 
participants. 
Participants 
established social 
ties to other 
community 
members via joint 
work on projects. Better relations 
with City Council 
members, and 
citizens felt more 
comfortable 
contacting their 
government.
USA
New York City 
Open Data 
PortalNo data on outcomes.149
AnnexesMedium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
USA
New York City 
Controller’s 
PortalNo data on outcomes.
USA
Virginia SRCNo data on outcomes.
Context B
Brazil
São Paulo, 
extension of 
the national 
Basic Education 
Development 
IndexNo data on outcomes.
Brazil
Decennial 
National 
Education Plan 
(PNE)Target budget for education 
increased from 7% to 10% GDP 
for 2014–23.Some amendments 
from civil 
society were not 
supported.
Colombia
Bogotá School 
Feeding 
Programme, 
open contractingSavings of 10–15% were made 
owing to cuts in intermediaries.Better choice of suppliers due to 
framework contracts.Using open data which 
became available due to open 
contracting, CSOs developed 
software to allow parents to 
monitor school menus and 
submit complaints. More trust in 
government from 
the business 
community (more 
companies dared 
to participate in 
bidding).Cartel arrangements 
were uncovered among 
fruit suppliers (SIC 
investigation of price-
fixing in fruit tenders).150
Annexes
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
El Salvador
EDUCOThe per-student cost was 25% 
higher than in non-EDUCO 
schools, but over 20 years the 
student advancement costs 
equalized with non-EDUCO 
schools.The programme was negatively 
perceived by teachers, because 
they were not included in teacher 
transfer, career advancement, 
and pension systems. Parents 
felt empowered, but since the 
programme’s closure in 2010, 
they have observed an increase 
in teacher absenteeism which it 
has not been within their power 
to reduce.Parental 
empowerment 
and teacher 
dissatisfaction with 
the programme’s 
benefits contributed 
to reduced trust 
between teachers 
and parents.
Ghana
Open education 
committee 
hearings62% of citizens 
report some or a 
significant level of 
trust in committees’ 
effectiveness.Anecdotal: petty 
corruption is uncovered.
India
VECs (control 
over teacher 
attendance)Increase in attendance of  
civil servant teachers: in 
Madhya Pradesh +17% from 
64%, in Uttar Pradesh +23% 
from 61%. No impact in 
Karnataka.The most problematic teacher 
group – male civil service 
teachers from upper castes – 
saw the highest increase in 
engagement.More active committees (more meetings, 
more members at meetings, school 
inspections). However, increase in 
participation varied by caste, gender, 
and position in the school committee: 
chair members of the committees 
became more involved than parent 
members, and committee members from 
upper castes reported more participation 
than those from lower castes.151
AnnexesMedium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Indonesia
School 
committees: 
election of 
members, 
connecting 
school 
committees to 
village councils 
(linkage)Linkage and linkage plus 
elections are more cost-effective 
than elections alone. Teacher 
hours increased by one hour 
per week for linkage plus 
election interventions.Elections and 
linkage plus 
elections increased 
community 
engagement.‘Engaging the more 
powerful village 
council leads to 
concrete actions 
on the ground 
and increases 
the legitimacy of 
the cosponsored 
initiatives.’ 
(Pradhan et al., 
2014: 109).
Kenya
Extra Teacher 
Programme, 
Western Province 
(with and 
without school 
committee – 
SBM/non-SBM)50% decrease in class size 
due to extra teachers.Although the number of civil 
servant teachers fell due to the 
provision of extra teachers, in 
SBM schools this reduction was 
halved (as extra teachers were 
not used to substitute for civil 
servant teachers). Hiring of extra teachers: 
non-SBM schools were 
more likely to hire 
relatives of civil servant 
teachers than SBM 
schools (statistically 
non-significant). In SBM 
schools, there was no sign 
that school committees 
hired weaker relatives or 
let teachers’ relatives get 
away with lower effort.152
Annexes
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Mexico
Improve Your 
SchoolBetter use of resources for 
teacher salaries: parents used 
the platform to prove cases of 
absenteeism, resulting in the 
firing of teachers.Anecdotal: 
parents felt more 
empowered vis-à-
vis teachers when 
they had access to 
information.Competent 
principals benefited 
from knowing 
about schools’ 
and parents’ 
engagement.Data made possible 
the publication of the 
corruption report. Ten 
states initiated audits, 
and teacher payrolls are 
now being funded by 
the federal government 
instead of state 
governments.
Moldova
Școala Mea (My 
School)The project contributed to the 
consolidation of the unitary 
national system for open data 
in education by facilitating the 
process of diversifying existing 
types of data and improving 
access to information. The Ministry of 
Education acknowledged 
recommendations for 
improvements in its open data 
handling.Public hearings on school budgets 
were met with resistance from school 
managers; however, after one year 
among participating schools (40) there 
was evidence of greater trust between 
school managers and communities, 
and communities were more involved 
(e.g. through in-kind contributions for 
extracurricular activities).
Nepal
Social audits 
(Kaski, Dolakha, 
Nawalparasi 
districts)No data on outcomes.153
AnnexesMedium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Niger
School 
committees 
COGES grantsTeacher attendance decreased 
slightly (due to a lack of 
education and association 
experience, while parents 
lacked authority over teachers 
and knowledge of how school 
works). Attendance increased 
among first-graders.Grants increased 
parent participation, 
but parents were 
more likely to invest 
in infrastructure 
than learning 
materials and/or 
teacher support. 
This led to conflict 
between teachers and 
parents except in 
one-teacher schools.The empowerment 
of parents 
resulted in the 
disengagement 
of teachers owing 
to conflictual 
relations. Only 
in single-teacher 
schools did 
investments 
support an 
increase in teacher 
attendance.
Pakistan
SRC in Punjab 
ProvinceThere were no clear 
consequences for accountability 
based on SRC results embedded 
in the process. As a result, there 
were no significant changes in 
school performance.
Paraguay
Ciudad del Este 
municipality use 
of open data to 
monitor school 
fundingPrior to the open data portal, 
such studies cost USD 2 600 for 
the NGO and took 8 months. In 
2017, the study took 2 weeks and 
cost USD 200–300.The case is an 
example of public re-
use of governmental 
open data.There seems to be a 
lack of follow-up on 
the part of government 
to end impunity when 
information on the 
mismanagement of 
funds becomes available.154
Annexes
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Peru
Standardized 
testing soap 
operaParental support helped to 
overcome teachers’ opposition 
to standardized testing.
Philippines
CheckmyschoolThere is anecdotal evidence of 
improvement in nutrition and 
the state of school buildings.
Philippines
National 
Textbook 
Delivery 
ProgrammeSavings of USD 1.4 million, a 
reduction in the average cost 
of textbooks by 40%, and a 
reduction in bidding time from 
24 to 12 months (G-Watch, 
2015).Improvement in the quality 
of textbooks (suppliers were 
concerned with not getting the 
bid the following year if the 
reported quality was poor).Community 
participation in 
monitoring textbook 
delivery fostered by 
local NGOs.Order No. 59, 
‘Institutionalising 
NGO and 
Private Sector 
Participation in 
the Department’s 
Procurement 
Process’, 
institutionalized 
state–society 
collaboration.
Philippines
School-building 
monitoringConstruction of schools focuses 
on areas with acute need.Anecdotal: 
nationwide 
mobilization and 
capacity building 
of communities to 
check on school-
building projects in 
their schools.Initiative adopted 
as the community-
based monitoring 
component of 
the Department’s 
Regular School 
Building 
Programme.Focus on corruption 
prevention, but no 
estimation of actual 
results is given.155
AnnexesMedium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Philippines
OpenARMM: 
Improving 
Schools in the 
Autonomous 
Region of 
Muslim 
MindanaoOnly 100 of ca. 2,000 schools in 
the region were geotagged.Civil society has 
not been involved 
properly owing to a 
lack of commitment 
on the part of 
government to data 
collection.
Tanzania
Mobile phone 
panelNo data on outcomes.
Tanzania
Kigoma-Ujiji 
transparency 
in education 
platformNo data on outcomes.
Uganda
School transfers 
info in local 
mediaTest scores and school 
enrolment rose following an 
increase in funds (Reinikka 
and Svensson, 2005).80% of funds reached 
schools as intended 
(although 20% is still 
embezzled).156
Annexes
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Ukraine
Lviv 
Participatory 
BudgetHalf of the projects from 2016 
were not implemented in 2017.The Participatory Budget was 
designed to attract community 
space-related/creative projects, 
but due to school engagement, 
these are mostly infrastructure-
related (participatory 
budgeting is seen as a way to 
compensate for funds lacking 
from the city administration).The abundance 
of school and 
kindergarten 
infrastructure 
projects caused 
tensions between 
these projects and 
‘non-education’ 
projects (this 
spurred discussion 
as to whether 
there should be a 
separate category for 
education projects).Some City Council 
members authored 
projects and 
mobilized voters. 
This gave rise to 
the perception 
that they were 
motivated by 
political gain. 
There is an 
ongoing discussion 
as to whether they 
should be allowed 
to submit projects.Multiple cases of 
organized voting 
pressure exerted on 
parents and teachers 
were observed (signs 
of corruption/fraud at 
elections).157
Medium-term 
outcomesImproved public service Economic and social added value Good governance
Country
InitiativeImprovement in government 
efficiency (resources)Improvement in government 
effectiveness (goals)Public re-use Community 
resultsTrust Reduction of  
corruption risks
Ukraine
Lviv 
Participatory 
BudgetHalf of the projects from 2016 
were not implemented in 2017.The Participatory Budget was 
designed to attract community 
space-related/creative projects, 
but due to school engagement, 
these are mostly infrastructure-
related (participatory 
budgeting is seen as a way to 
compensate for funds lacking 
from the city administration).The abundance 
of school and 
kindergarten 
infrastructure 
projects caused 
tensions between 
these projects and 
‘non-education’ 
projects (this 
spurred discussion 
as to whether 
there should be a 
separate category for 
education projects).Some City Council 
members authored 
projects and 
mobilized voters. 
This gave rise to 
the perception 
that they were 
motivated by 
political gain. 
There is an 
ongoing discussion 
as to whether they 
should be allowed 
to submit projects.Multiple cases of 
organized voting 
pressure exerted on 
parents and teachers 
were observed (signs 
of corruption/fraud at 
elections).References
Aceron, J. 2013. ‘Constructing Philippine education, one school-building’ .
Unpublished. 
Adams, R. 2013. ‘School database lets parents compare GCSE results by 
subject’ . The Guardian , 11 September. Retrieved from: www.theguardian.
com/education/2013/sep/11/school-database-gcse-results-subject.
Alberta Government. 2018. Education. Annual report 2017–18. Edmonton, 
Alberta: Alberta Government: Retrieved from: www.alberta.ca/
government-and-ministry-annual-reports.aspx#17-18.
Alonso, S. 2015. ‘Wählen Ohne Wahl’ . In: W. Merkel (Ed.), Demokratie Und 
Krise: Zum Schwierigen Verhältnis von Theorie Und Empirie (pp. 245–74). 
Wiesbaden, Germany: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. Retrieved 
from: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-05945-3_9.
Andvig, J.C.; Fjeldstad, O.-H. 2001. Corruption: A review of contemporary 
research . Bergen, Norway: Chr. Michelsen Institute.
Arnstein, S.R. 1969. ‘ A ladder of citizen participation’ . In: Journal of the 
American Institute of Planners, 35(4), 216–24. Retrieved from: https://
doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225.
Baena Olabe, P .; Bertok, J.; Al-Attar, S.; Bacio-T erracino, J.; Kilnes, U.; 
Skoratko, L. 2013. Investing in trust: Leveraging institutions for inclusive 
policy making. Background Paper. Paris: OECD Publishing. Retrieved 
from: www.oecd.org/gov/ethics/Investing-in-trust.pdf.
Banerjee, A.V .; Banerji, R.; Duflo, E.; Glennerster, R.; Khemani, S. 2010. 
‘Pitfalls of participatory programs: Evidence from a randomized 
evaluation in education in India’ . In: American Economic Journal: 
Economic Policy, 2(1), 1–30. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1257/
pol.2.1.1.
Bauhr, M.; Grimes, M. 2014. ‘Indignation or resignation: The implications 
of transparency for societal accountability’ . In: Governance, 27(2), 
291–320. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1111/gove.12033.158References
———. 2017. ‘T ransparency to curb corruption? Concepts, measures and 
empirical merit’ . In: Crime, Law and Social Change, 68(4), 431–58. 
Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10611-017-9695-1.
Bauhr, M.; Grimes, M.; Harring, N. 2010. Seeing the state: The implications 
of transparency for societal accountability. QoG Working Paper Series, 
15. Gothenburg, Sweden: Quality of Government Institute. Retrieved 
from: https://qog.pol.gu.se/digitalAssets/1350/1350160_2010_15_
bauhr_grimes_harring.pdf.
Beasley, E.; Huillery, E. 2015. Willing but unable: Short-term experimental 
evidence on parent empowerment and school quality. Cambridge, MA: 
Poverty Action Lab. Retrieved from: www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/
default/files/publications/185%20Niger-%20Willing%20but%20
Unable%202015.01.19.pdf.
Beichelt, T .; Hahn, I.; Schimmelfennig, F.; Worschech, S. (Eds). 2014. Civil 
society and democracy promotion. Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Bell, M. 2008. Service-oriented modeling: Service analysis, design, and 
architecture . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
———. 2010. SOA modeling patterns for service-oriented discovery and analysis. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Beresford, H. (Ed.). 1974. Participatory planning in education . Paris: OECD. 
Retrieved from: https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED107653.pdf.
Bremers, J.; Deleu, W. 2016. T owards faster implementation and uptake of open 
government: Final report. Brussels: European Commission. Retrieved 
from: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/final-
report-study-towards-faster-implementation-and-uptake-open-
government-smart-20150041.
Brown, S.; Neumann, G. 2017. ‘Paraguay’s transparency alchemists – open 
contracting stories’ . Medium , 2  October. Retrieved from: https://
medium.com/open-contracting-stories/paraguays-transparency-
alchemists-623c8e3c538f.159References
———. 2018. ‘The deals behind the meals – open contracting stories’ . 
Medium , 10 April. Retrieved from: https://medium.com/open-
contracting-stories/the-deals-behind-the-meals-c4592e9466a2.
Canovan, M. 1999. ‘T rust the people! Populism and the two faces of 
democracy’ . In: Political Studies, 47(1), 2–16. Retrieved from: https://
doi.org/10.1111/1467-9248.00184.
Carothers, T . (Ed.). 2016. Ideas for future work on transparency and 
accountability. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace. Retrieved from: https://carnegieendowment.org/2016/05/02/
ideas-for-future-work-on-transparency-and-accountability-pub-63318.
Carothers, T .; Brechenmacher, S. 2014. ‘ Accountability, transparency, 
participation, and inclusion: A new development consensus?’ Brief. 
Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
Retrieved from: https://carnegieendowment.org/files/development_
consensus_brief.pdf.
Cartier-Bresson, J. 1997. ‘Corruption networks, transaction security and 
illegal social exchange’ . In: Political Studies, 45(3), 463–476. Retrieved 
from: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9248.00091/
abstract.
Charron, N.; Rothstein, B. 2018. ‘Regions of trust and distrust: How good 
institutions can foster social cohesion’ . In: U. Bernitz, M. Mårtensson, 
T . Persson, and L. Oxelheim (Eds), Bridging the prosperity gap in the EU: 
The social challenges ahead, (pp. 220–242). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Cheng, X.J.; Moses, K.D. 2016. Promoting transparency through information: 
A global review of school report cards. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
Cornford, J.; Wilson, R.; Baines, S.; Richardson, R. 2013. ‘Local governance 
in the new information ecology: The challenge of building interpretative 
communities’ . In: Public Money and Management, 33(3), 201–208. 
Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1080/09540962.2013.785705.160References
Council of Europe. 2007. Strategy on innovation and good governance at local 
level. Extract from the Valencia Declaration 15th Conference of 
European Ministers Responsible for Local and Regional Government. 
Valencia, Spain: Council of Europe. Retrieved from: https://rm.coe.
int/1680701699.
———. n.d. 12 principles of good governance and European Label of Governance 
Excellence (ELoGE) . Valencia, Spain: Council of Europe. Accessed 
14  December 2018: www.coe.int/en/web/good-governance/12-
principles-and-eloge.
Custer, S.; Rahemtulla, H.; Kaiser, K-A.; van den Brink, R. 2016. From pork 
to performance: Open government and program performance tracking in 
the Philippines. Philippines Open Government Support, Phase II. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. Retrieved from: http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/174491467602317699/pdf/PH-154297-
OG2Public-WB-Cover.pdf.
Dávid-Barrett, E. 2017. ‘Turning big data into a useful anticorruption tool 
in Africa’ . The Global Anticorruption Blog, 1 June. Retrieved from: 
https://globalanticorruptionblog.com/2017/06/01/guest-post-
turning-big-data-into-a-useful-anticorruption-tool-in-africa.
Department of Education (USA). 2013. For each and every child – a strategy 
for education equity and excellence. The Equity and Excellence 
Commission Report to the Secretary. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Education. Retrieved from: www2.ed.gov/about/
bdscomm/list/eec/equity-excellence-commission-report.pdf.
De Ferranti, D.; Jacinto, J.; Ody, A.J.; Ramshaw, G. 2009. How to improve 
governance: A new framework for analysis and action. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press.
Duflo, E.; Dupas, P .; Kremer, M. 2015. ‘School governance, teacher incentives, 
and pupil–teacher ratios: Experimental evidence from Kenyan primary 
schools’ . In: Journal of Public Economics, 123(2015), 92–110. Retrieved 
from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.11.008.161References
European Data Portal. n.d. ‘Education: Open data in schools’ . Accessed 
4 December 2018: www.europeandataportal.eu/en/highlights/open-
data-schools.
Felicia, N. 2018. Indonesia: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability. Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-
UNESCO.
Fisun, O. 2012. ‘Rethinking post-Soviet politics from a neopatrimonial 
perspective’ . In:  Democratizatsiya: The Journal of Post-Soviet 
Democratization , 20(2), 87–96.
Florez, A.; Moore, A.; Field, S.; Kluve, J. 2015. Evaluating the impact of closing 
a community managed schools programme in El Salvador, 3ie Grantee Final 
Report . New Delhi: International Initiative for Impact Assessment (3ie). 
Retrieved from: www.fhi360.org/sites/default/files/media/
documents/educo-report-final.pdf.
Foa, R.S.; Mounk, Y. 2017. ‘The signs of deconsolidation’ . In: Journal of 
Democracy , 28(1), 5–15.
Follesdal, A.; Hix, S. 2006. ‘Why there is a democratic deficit in the EU: 
A response to Majone and Moravcsik’ . In: Journal of Common Market 
Studies , 44(3), 533–62. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1468-5965.2006.00650.x.
Fung, A. 2006. ‘Varieties of participation in complex governance’ . In: Public 
Administration Review, 66(s1), 66–75. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2006.00667.x.
———. 2013. ‘Infotopia: Unleashing the democratic power of transparency’ . 
In: Politics and Society, 41(2), 183–212. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.1177/0032329213483107.
Fung, A.; Wright, E.O. 2003. Deepening democracy: Institutional innovations 
in empowered participatory governance. The Real Utopias Project 4. 
London: Verso.162References
Galster, A. 2018. Transparency and open government. 35th Session 
CG35(2018)14final. Strasbourg: Congress of Local and Regional 
Authorities, Council of Europe. Retrieved from: https://search.coe.
int/cm/pages/result_details.aspx?ObjectId=09000016808d341c.
García Reyes, E.A. 2018. ‘Open government in education from the 
experiences of cities in Latin America’ . Working Paper. Paris: IIEP-
UNESCO.
Gittell, M. 1972. ‘Decentralization and citizen participation in education’ . 
In: Public Administration Review, 32(October), 670. Retrieved from: 
https://doi.org/10.2307/975232.
Govinda, R. 1999. Reaching the unreached through participatory planning: 
School mapping in Lok Jumbish, India. School Mapping and Local-Level 
Planning. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Retrieved from: http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0011/001175/117580e.pdf.
Granickas, K. 2015. Open city: Local government and open data. T opic report 
2015/07. European Public Sector Information (ePSI) Platform. 
Retrieved from: www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/files/2015_
open_city_local_government_and_open_data.pdf.
Grassie, M.C. 1974. Participatory planning in education . IIЕР Occasional 
Papers, 36. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Retrieved from: http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0007/000734/073483eo.pdf.
G-Watch. 2015. ‘T extbook count in the Philippines’ . G-Watch , 2 November. 
Retrieved from: www.g-watch.org/news-release/textbook-count-
philippines.
Habibov, N.; Afandi, E.; Cheung, A. 2017. ‘Sand or grease? Corruption-
institutional trust nexus in post-Soviet countries’ . In: Journal of Eurasian 
Studies , 8(2), 172–84. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
euras.2017.05.001.
Hale, H.E. 2015. Patronal politics: Eurasian regime dynamics in comparative 
perspective . Problems of International Politics. New Y ork: Cambridge 
University Press.163References
Hallak, J.; Poisson, P . 2007. Corrupt schools, corrupt universities: What can be 
done? Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
Hammo, B.; Fletcher, S. 2017. ‘High school participatory budget (Poitou-
Charentes, France)’ . Participedia . Retrieved from: www.participedia.
net/en/cases/high-school-participatory-budget-poitou-charentes-
france.
Hansson, K.; Belkacem, K.; Ekenberg, L. 2015. ‘Open government and 
democracy: A research review’ . In: Social Science Computer Review, 33(5), 
540–55. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439314560847.
Harrison, T .M.; Guerrero, S.; Burke, B.G.; Cook, M.; Cresswell, A.; Helbig, 
N.; Hrdinova, J.; Pardo, T . 2012. ‘Open government and e-government: 
Democratic challenges from a public value perspective’ . In: Information 
Polity , 17(2), 83–97. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.3233/IP-
2012-0269.
Hart, D.K. 1972. ‘Theories of government related to decentralization and 
citizen participation’ . In: Public Administration Review , 32(October), 
603. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.2307/975228.
Heller, N. 2015. ‘ A working definition of “open government”’ . Global Integrity , 
23 May. Retrieved from: www.globalintegrity.org/2012/05/working-
definition-opengov.
Heller, P . 2001. ‘Moving the state: The politics of democratic decentralization 
in Kerala, South Africa, and Porto Alegre’ . In: Politics and Society, 29(1), 
131–63. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1177/00323292010290
01006.
IAP2 (International Association for Public Participation). n.d. Core values, 
ethics, spectrum – the 3 pillars of public participation. Denver, CO: 
International Association for Public Participation. Accessed 
11 December 2018: www.iap2.org/page/pillars.
IBP (International Budget Partnership). 2017. Open Budget Survey 2017 
methodology. Washington, DC. IBP . Retrieved from: www.
internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/methodology.164References
Jacob, W.J.; Holsinger, D.B. 2008. ‘ Inequality in education: A critical analysis ’.
In: D.B. Holsinger and W.J. Jacob (Eds), Inequality in education: 
Comparative and international perspectives  (pp 1– 34). Hong Kong: 
Springer. Retrieved from: http://sociologia.davidjustino.com/wp-
content/uploads/2012/05/HOLSINGER2008_inequality_in_
education.pdf.
Johnston, E. 2010. ‘Governance infrastructures in 2020’ . In: Public 
Administration Review, 70(December), 122–28. Retrieved from: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02254.x.
Johnston, E.W.; Hansen, D.L. 2011. ‘Design lessons for smart governance 
infrastructures’ . In: D.  Ink, A.  Balutis, and T .  Buss (Eds), American 
governance 3.0: Rebooting the public square? Washington, DC: National 
Academy of Public Administration.
Johnston, M. 2014. Corruption, contention and reform: The power of deep 
democratization . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kafle, P .A.; Patel, D.; Agarwal, S. 2012. Social audits in Nepal’s community 
schools: Measuring policy against practice. Open Knowledge Repository. 
Washington, DC: World Bank Group. Retrieved from: https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/20178.
Kaplan, I.; Pyman, M. n.d. ‘Curbing corruption – education’ . Curbing 
Corruption  (blog). Accessed 16  November 2018: https://
curbingcorruption.com/sector/education.
Kapur, A.; Sahgal, G.; Choudhary, P . 2014. ‘Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan Programme, 
Rajasthan, India’ . In: M. Poisson (Ed.), Achieving transparency in pro-poor 
education incentives  (pp. 131–64). Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Retrieved from: 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark :/48223/pf0000226982.
Kasdan, A.; Cattell, L. 2013. A people’s budget. A research and evaluation report 
on the pilot year of participatory budgeting in New York City. New Y ork: 
Urban Justice Center. Retrieved from: https://cdp.urbanjustice.org/
cdp-reports/PBNYC4.165References
Karim, S. 2004. Transparency in education: Report card in Bangladesh. Quality 
Schools Programme in Mexico. Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: 
IIEP-UNESCO.
Khan, K. 2018. Punjab, Pakistan: Using open school data to improve transparency 
and accountability. Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-
UNESCO.
Klitgaard, R. 1988. Controlling corruption . Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press. Retrieved from: http://public.eblib.com/choice/
publicfullrecord.aspx?p=837316.
Koopman, G.R.; Isbister, R.L. 1958. ‘Citizen participation in school affairs’ . 
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development (ASCD). Retrieved from: www.ascd.org/ASCD/pdf/
journals/ed_lead/el_195804_isbister.pdf.
Kossow, N.; Dykes, V . 2018a. Embracing digitalisation: How to use ICT to 
strengthen anti-corruption. Anti-Corruption and Integrity Programme. 
Bonn: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
GmbH. Retrieved from: www.giz.de/de/downloads/giz2018-eng_
ICT-to-strengthen-Anti-Corruption.pdf.
———. 2018 b. ‘Blockchain, bitcoin and corruption: A review of the linkages’ . 
T ransparency International Knowledge Hub. Berlin: T ransparency 
International. Retrieved from: https://knowledgehub.transparency.
org/helpdesk/bitcoin-blockchain-and-corruption-an-overview.
Krasovska, Z. 2017. ‘Prypynyty Bytvu Shkil. IAki Novi Pravyla Potribni 
Hromads′komu Biudzhetu L′vova’ [Stop the battle of schools. What 
new rules are needed in the Lviv public budget]. Tvoie Misto, 9 August. 
Retrieved from: http://tvoemisto.tv/exclusive/novi_pravyla_dlya_
gromadskogo_byudzhetu_lvova_chy_prypynytsya_bytva_
shkil_91370.html?fbclid=IwAR112yAWN9cWUQWeeuXnsFl9f
Wu-lRWjoXcqv977j6OBosVViRZQxxeYxCs.
Krenjova, J.; Raudla, R. 2013. ‘Participatory budgeting at the local level: 
Challenges and opportunities for new democracies’ . In: Halduskultuur 
– Administrative Culture, 14(1), 18–46.166References
Lerner, J. 2018. ‘Participatory budgeting in NYC: $210 million for 706 
community projects’ . Participatory Budgeting Project (blog), 11 June. 
Retrieved from: www.participatorybudgeting.org/participatory-
budgeting-in-nyc.
Lindberg, S.I. 2013. ‘Mapping accountability: Core concept and subtypes’ . 
In: International Review of Administrative Sciences , 79(2), 202–26. 
Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1177/0020852313477761.
Linders, D. 2012. ‘From e-government to we-government: Defining a 
typology for citizen coproduction in the age of social media’ . In: 
Government Information Quarterly , 29(4), 446–54. Retrieved from: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2012.06.003.
Linders, D.; Wilson, S.C. 2011. ‘What is open government? One year after 
the Directive’ . In: Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Digital 
Government Research Conference on Digital Government Innovation in 
Challenging Times (pp. 262–271). College Park, MD: ACM Press. 
Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1145/2037556.2037599.
Lipovsek, V . 2016. ‘Multiple ways to go deeper and wider’ . In: T . Carothers 
et  al. (Eds), Ideas for future work on transparency and accountability. 
Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
Retrieved from: https://carnegieendowment.org/2016/05/02/ideas-
for-future-work-on-transparency-and-accountability-pub-63318.
Luna-Reyes, L.F.; Chun, S.A. 2012. ‘Open government and public 
participation: Issues and challenges in creating public value’ . In: 
Information Polity , 17(2), 77–81.
Mansuri, G.; Rao, V . 2013. Localizing development: Does participation work? A 
World Bank Policy Research Report. Washington, DC: International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank. Retrieved from: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
handle/10986/11859/9780821382561.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
Martyniv, M. 2017. ‘Hromads′ky Biudzhet: Rekordne Holosuvannia, 
Chastyna – z Prymusu’ . [Public budget: Record voting, partly by 167References
coercion]. Zbruch , 20 November. Retrieved from: https://zbruc.eu/
node/73267?fbclid=IwAR2CaluKeoHI WobixKqWESkaQYBk 
CjDU3DYY gCoNf UMElbDleZ6Z97ayJSk.
MEC (Monitoring and Evaluation Committee). 2017. Analysis of corruption 
vulnerabilities across the Afghan school education system. Kabul: 
Afghanistan Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation Committee.
Meijer, A.; Grimmelikhuijsen, S.; Brandsma, G.J. 2012. ‘Communities of 
public service support’ . In: Government Information Quarterly, 29(1), 
21–29. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2011.06.004.
Mendel, T .; Meyer-Resende, M.; Maib-Chatré, E.; Serrato, R.; Stark, I. 2014. 
International standards on transparency and accountability. Briefing 
Paper 47. Berlin: Democracy Reporting International. Retrieved from: 
http://democracy-reporting.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/dri-
bp-47_international_standards_on_transparency_and_
accountability_2014-03.pdf.
Moore, M.H. 2000. Creating public value: Strategic management in government. 
5th edn. Vol. 33. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mossberger, K.; Wu, Y.; Crawford, J. 2013. ‘Connecting citizens and local 
governments? Social media and interactivity in major U.S. cities’ . In: 
Government Information Quarterly , 30(4), 351–58. Retrieved from: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2013.05.016.
Moynihan, D.P . 2007. ‘Citizen participation in budgeting: Prospects for 
developing countries’ . In: A. Shah (Ed.), Participatory budgeting, 
(pp. 55–87). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Mungiu-Pippidi, A. 2015. The quest for good governance: How societies develop 
control of corruption. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
North, D.C.; Wallis, J.J.; Webb, S.B.; Weingast, B.R. 2007. Limited access orders 
in the developing world: A new approach to the problems of development. 
Vol. 4359. Washington, DC: World Bank Publications. Retrieved from: 
http://econweb.umd.edu/~wallis/MyPapers/Limted_Access_
Orders_in_the_Developing_WorldWPS4359.pdf.168References
North, D.C.; Wallis, J.J.; Weingast, B.R. 2009. Violence and social orders: A 
conceptual framework for interpreting recorded human history. Cambridge, 
UK/New Y ork, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Nuland, van, S.; Poisson, M. 2009. T eacher codes: Learning from experience. 
Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
NYC Open Data. 2018. ‘Upcoming contracts to be awarded (CIP)’ . Retrieved 
from: https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Housing-Development/
Upcoming-contracts-to-be-awarded-CIP-/tsak-vtv3.
OCP/WBI (Open Contracting Partnership/World Bank Institute). 2013. 
Open contracting: A new frontier for transparency and accountability. 
Washington, DC: World Bank Institute/Open Contracting Partnership. 
Retrieved from: www.open-contracting.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/02/OCP2013_Paper-NewFrontierforT ransparency.pdf.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2005. 
Modernising government: The way forward. Paris: OECD Publishing. 
Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264010505-en.
———. 2009. Focus on citizens: Public engagement for better policy and services. 
Paris: OECD Publishing.
———. 2011. Asset declarations for public officials: A tool to prevent corruption. 
Paris: OECD Publishing. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.1787/9789264095281-en.
———. 2016. Open government: The global context and the way forward. Paris: 
OECD Publishing. Retrieved from: www.oecd.org/gov/open-gov-way-
forward-highlights.pdf.
———. 2017. ‘Recommendation of the Council on Open Government’ . 
C(2017)140-C/M(2017)22. Council of the OECD. Retrieved from: 
www.oecd.org/gov/Recommendation-Open-Government-Approved-
Council-141217.pdf.169References
———. 2018a. Open government data report: Enhancing policy maturity for 
sustainable impact . Paris: OECD Publishing.
———. 2018b. OECD handbook for internationally comparative education 
statistics 2018: Concepts, standards, definitions and classifications. Paris: 
OECD Publishing.
———. 2018c. Open government data in Mexico: The way forward. Paris: 
OECD Publishing.
Open Data Charter. 2015. ‘International Open Data Charter’ . Retrieved 
from: https://opendatacharter.net/principles.
Open Government Initiative. n.d. ‘Declaration of Local Open Government 
Principles’ . Retrieved from: http://opengovernmentinitiative.org/
declaration-of-local-open-government-principles.
OGP (Open Government Partnership). 2011. Open Government Declaration. 
Washington, DC: OGP . Retrieved from: www.opengovpartnership.
org/open-government-declaration.
———. 2014. Open Government Guide. Washington, DC: OGP .
———. 2016. Open Government Subnational Declaration. Washington, DC: 
OGP . Retrieved from: www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/
files/OGP_subnational-declaration_EN.pdf.
———. 2017. What’s in the OGP Subnational Action Plans? Washington, 
DC: OGP . Retrieved from: www.opengovpartnership.org/resources/
whats-ogp-subnational-action-plans-2017.
———. 2018. 03 Posting education sector data and receipts of free education 
fund online by July 2017. Washington, DC: OGP . Retrieved from: www.
opengovpartnership.org/commitment/03-posting-education-sector-
data-and-receipts-of-free-education-fund-online-july-2017.
———. n.d.a  OGP Local Program . Washington, DC: OGP . Accessed 
7 February 2019: www.opengovpartnership.org/local.170References
———. n.d.b  Open government guide – glossary. Washington, DC: OGP . 
Accessed 12  December 2018: www.opengovpartnership.org/open-
government-guide-glossary.
O’Reilly, T . 2011. ‘Government as a platform’ . In: Innovations: T echnology, 
Governance, Globalization, 6(1), 13–40. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.1162/INOV_a_00056.
Orszag, P .R. 2009. ‘Open government directive: Memorandum for the heads 
of executive departments and agencies’ . The White House, 8 December. 
Retrieved from: www.treasury.gov/open/Documents/m10-06.pdf.
Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for 
collective action. Political Economy of Institutions and Decisions. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Pandey, P .; Goyal, S.; Sundararaman, V . 2009. ‘Community participation in 
public schools: Impact of information campaigns in three Indian states’ . 
In: Education Economics , 17(3), 355–75. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.1080/09645290903157484.
———. 2011. Does information improve school accountability? Results of a 
large randomized trial. Discussion paper series no. 49. Washington, DC: 
World Bank Group.
Pandey, P .; Sehgal, A.R.; Riboud, M.; Levine, D.; Goyal, M. 2007. ‘Informing 
resource-poor populations and the delivery of entitled health and social 
services in rural India: A cluster randomized controlled trial’ . In: Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 298(16), 1867. Retrieved from: 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.298.16.1867.
Parafina, R.S. 2018. Philippines: Using open school data to improve transparency 
and accountability. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
Parks, W. 1957. ‘The open government principle: Applying the right to know 
under the constitution’ . In: George Washington Law Review, 26(1), 1–22. 171References
Participatory Budgeting Project. n.d. ‘Participatory budgeting in schools and 
school districts’ . Participatory Budgeting Project (blog). Accessed 
5 February 2019: www.participatorybudgeting.org/pb-in-schools.
PEO (Programme Evaluation Organisation). 2010. Evaluation Report on 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. Mumbai: PEO. 
Persson, A.; Rothstein, B.; T eorell, J. 2013. ‘Why anticorruption reforms 
fail-systemic corruption as a collective action problem’ . In: Governance, 
26(3), 449–71. Retrieved from: http://doi.wiley.
com/10.1111/j.1468-0491. 2012.01604.x.
Poisson, M. 2009. Guidelines for the design and effective use of teacher codes of 
conduct . Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
———. 2010. Corruption and education . Education Policy Series. Paris: 
IIEP-UNESCO.
Pradhan, M.; Suryadarma, D.; Beatty, A.; Wong, M.; Gaduh, A.; Alisjahbana, 
A.; Artha, R.P . 2014. ‘Improving educational quality through enhancing 
community participation: Results from a randomized field experiment 
in Indonesia’ . In: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(2), 
105–26. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1257/app.6.2.105.
Quittkat, C. 2013. ‘New instruments serving democracy’ . In: B. Kohler-Koch 
and C. Quittkat (Eds), De-mystification of participatory democracy: EU 
governance and civil society, (pp.  85–111). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof.
Rabič, V .S., Miklaužič, P .; Miklič, G. 2017. ‘Local Action Plan of Participation 
of Municipality of Kranjska Gora’ . Lille, France: Interreg Europe. 
Retrieved from: http://switzerland.alpine-space.eu/projects/gaya/
results/local-action-plan-of-participation/gaya_lapp_kranjska-gora_
en.pdf.
Rabinowitz, S. 2018. Australia: Using open school data to improve transparency 
and accountability. Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-
UNESCO.172References
Reinikka, R.; Svensson, J. 2005. ‘Fighting corruption to improve schooling: 
Evidence from a newspaper campaign in Uganda’ . In: Journal of the 
European Economic Association, 3(2–3), 259–67.
Robinson, M.; Heller, N. 2015. ‘Subnational governments and the Open 
Government Partnership: Issues and options paper’ . Paris: Open 
Government Partnership. Retrieved from: www.opengovpartnership.
org/documents/subnational-governments-and-open-government-
partnership.
Roniger, L.; Güneş-Ayata, A. (Eds). 1994. Democracy, clientelism, and civil 
society. Boulder, CO: L. Rienner Publishers.
Rose-Ackerman, S. 1978. Corruption: A study in political economy. New Y ork, 
NY: Academic Press.
Roy, D.; Miah, A.S.J. 2018. Bangladesh: Using open school data to improve 
transparency and accountability. Case Study. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. 
Retrieved from: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265930_eng.
Rumbul, R. 2015. ‘Novel online approaches to citizen engagement’ . mySociety 
Research . Accessed 30 January 2020: https://research.mysociety.org/
publications/novel-approaches-to-online-citizen-engagement.
Rumbul, R.; Parsons, A.; Bramley, J. 2018. ‘Participatory budgeting: A meta-
level review’ . MySociety Research. 25 January. Retrieved from: http://
research.mysociety.org/publications/participatory-budgeting.
Rumbul, R.; Shaw, E. 2017. ‘Civic tech cities’ . MySociety Research, 1 May. 
Retrieved from: http://research.mysociety.org/publications/civic-
tech-cities.
Sjoberg, F.M.; Mellon, J.; Peixoto, T . 2015. ‘The effect of government 
responsiveness on future political participation’ . In: SSRN Electronic 
Journal , 26  February. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.2570898.173References
Stefes, C.H. 2003. ‘Kampf der Institutionen: Korruption, Marktwirtschaft  
und Rechtstaatlichkeit in der früheren Sowjetunion’ [The struggle of 
institutions: Corruption, market economy and rule of law in the former 
Soviet Union]. In: A. Croissant, P .  Bendel, and F.W.  Rüb (Eds), 
Demokratie und Staatlichkeit: Systemwechsel zwischen Staatsreform und 
Staatskollaps , (pp. 119–35). Opladen, Germany: Leske and Budrich.
———. 2006. Understanding post-Soviet transitions: Corruption, collusion and 
clientelism . Euro-Asian Studies. New Y ork: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stiglitz, J. 2002. ‘T ransparency in government’ . In: R. Islam, S. Djankov, and 
C. McLeish (Eds), The right to tell: The role of mass media in economic 
development (pp. 27–44). Washington, DC: World Bank. Retrieved 
from: https://doi.org/10.1596/0-8213-5203-2.
Student Engagement T eam. n.d. ‘Student Engagement’ . Accessed 
27 December 2018: https://education.alberta.ca/student-engagement/
student-engagement.
Sunlight Foundation; Open Contracting Partnership. 2016. ‘Municipal open 
contracting in American cities: Best practices and case studies’ . What 
Works Cities. Retrieved from: https://docs.google.com/document/
d/1SCzeObWsIEBcM2FvwOUH_sVHSSDKf NkaW Kgu15PvA0E/
edit.
T alpin, J.; Zobel, C. 2011. ‘Poitou-Charentes region (France): Participatory 
democracy’ . Inclusive Cities Observatory. Barcelona: United Cities and 
Local Governments (UCLG). Retrieved from: www.uclg-cisdp.org/
sites/default/files/Poitou-Charentes_2010_en_FINAL.pdf.
T ercanli, H.; Meerman, A. 2017. From drug capital to innovation hub. 
Amsterdam: University Industry Innovation Net-work.
T oderaș, N. 2015. ‘Report on the evaluation of the first year of implementation 
of the project “Școala Mea”’ . Retrieved from: http://scoalamea.md/
wp-content/uploads/Evaluation-report-EN.pdf.174References
T ormey, S. 2014. ‘The contemporary crisis of representative democracy’ . In: 
Democratic Theory , 1(2), 104–122. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.3167/dt.2014.010211.
T ransparency International. 2018. Corruption Perceptions Index 2017. Berlin: 
T ransparency International. Retrieved from: www.transparency.org/
news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017.
Tvoie misto. n.d. ‘Hromads′kyi Biudzhet L′vova: Iak Vypravyty Khyby  
Dosiahty Bil′shoho?’ [Lviv’s public budget. How to correct mistakes 
and achieve more]. Tvoie Misto, 7 December. Accessed 26 December 
2018: http://tvoemisto.tv/exclusive/gromadskyy_byudzhet_lvova_
yak_vypravyty_hyby_y_dosyagty_bilshogo_90207.html?fbclid=Iw
AR047VVht1kO3l0ke7ZGH6j6-0BEPEDAOL966MrGUTtfe_
T qXmrjXwDQCAw.
Twaweza. 2016. ‘How to run your own mobile phone survey’ . Twaweza , 
1 July. Retrieved from: www.twaweza.org/go/mpss-handbook.
UIS (UNESCO Institute of Statistics). 2018. Handbook on measuring equity 
in education . Montreal: UIS. Retrieved from: https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark :/48223/pf0000262806.
Ulbert, C. 2013. ‘How to hit a moving target: Assessing the effectiveness of 
public-private partnerships’ . In: H. Hegemann, R. Heller, and M. Kahl 
(Eds), Studying ‘effectiveness’ in international relations. A guide for students 
and scholars  (pp.  101–20). Opladen, Germany: Barbara Budrich 
Publishers.
UNESCO. 2017a . ‘ Accountability in education: Meeting our commitments’ . 
Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
———. 2017b . Sustainability in education: Meeting our commitments 2017/8. 
Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
United Nations. 1959. Declaration of the Rights of the Child. New Y ork, NY: 
United Nations. Retrieved from: www.un-documents.net/a14r1386.htm.
———. 2003. ‘United Nations Convention against Corruption’ . New Y ork, 
NY: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Retrieved from: www.175References
unodc.org/documents/treaties/UNCAC/Publications/
Convention/08-50026_E.pdf.
Vernez, G.; Karam, R.; Marshall, J.H. 2012. Implementation of school-based 
management in Indonesia. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Vigoda, E. 2002. ‘From responsiveness to collaboration: Governance, 
citizens, and the next generation of public administration’ . In: Public 
Administration Review, 62(5), 527–40. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.1111/1540-6210.00235.
Vlad, V . 2016. ‘Engaging citizens as a means to improve education: The 
experience of public hearings in Moldova’ . Global Partnership for Social 
Accountability (blog), 14 January. Retrieved from: http://gpsaknowledge.
org/blog/engaging-citizens-as-a-means-to-improve-education-the-
experience-of-public-hearings-in-moldova/#.XAbrkWhKjIU.
Weinstein, J.; Goldstein, J. 2012. ‘The beneﬁts of a big tent: Opening up 
government in developing countries. A response to Yu & Robinson’s 
The new ambiguity of “open government’’’ . In: UCLA Law Review 
Discourse, 38, 38–48. Retrieved from: www.uclalawreview.org/pdf/
discourse/60-3.pdf.
White House. 2009. ‘T ransparency and open government: Memorandum 
for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies’ . Presidential 
Documents Federal Register Vol. 74, No. 15. Washington, DC: White 
House. Retrieved from: https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-
press-office/transparency-and-open-government.
Williamson, V .; Eisen, N. 2016. The impact of open government: Assessing the 
evidence . Working Paper. Washington, DC: Center for Effective Public 
Management at Brookings. Retrieved from: www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/12/gs_20161208_opengovernment_report.pdf.
Wirtz, B.W.; Birkmeyer, S. 2015. ‘Open government: Origin, development, 
and conceptual perspectives’ . In: International Journal of Public 
Administration , 38(5), 381–96. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1
080/01900692.2014.942735.176References
World Bank. 2015. ‘Open government’ . Brief, 18  June. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. Retrieved from: www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
governance/brief/open-government-global-solutions-group.
———. 2016. Open government impact and outcomes: Mapping the landscape 
of ongoing research. Washington, DC: World Bank Open Government 
Global Solutions Group. Retrieved from: http://opengovimpact.org/
img/og-impact-full-report.pdf. Interactive table: http://opengovimpact.
org.
Y oung, A.; Verhulst, S. 2016. Open data’s impact. Mexico’s mejora tu escuela: 
Empowering citizens to make data-driven decisions about education. New 
Y ork, NY: GovLab/Omidyar Network. Retrieved from: http://
odimpact.org/files/case-study-mexico.pdf.
Y oung, E.; Quinn, L. 2002. Writing effective public policy papers: A guide for 
policy advisers in Central and Eastern Europe. Budapest: Open Society 
Institute. Retrieved from: www.icpolicyadvocacy.org/sites/icpa/files/
downloads/writing_effective_public_policy_papers_young_quinn.
pdf.
Yu, H.; Robinson, D.G. 2012. ‘The new ambiguity of “open government”’ .  
In: SSRN Electronic Journal, 2 March. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.2012489.
Zhang, J.; Puron-Cid, G.; Gil-Garcia, J.R. 2015. ‘Creating public value 
through open government: Perspectives, experiences and applications’ . 
In: Information Polity , 20(2, 3), 97–101. Retrieved from: https://doi.
org/10.3233/IP-150364.177
In the same series
Información y transparencia:  Cuadros de indicadores de las escuelas en 
América Latina
Alejandra Brito
Information and transparency: School report cards in sub-Saharan Africa
Jonathan Dupain; Lena Thuphuong Nguyen
Australia: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability
Stanley Rabinowitz
Bangladesh: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability 
Dipu Roy; Abu Said Md. Juel Miah
India: Using open school data to improve transparency and accountability 
Mridusmita Bordoloi; Varun Kapoor
Indonesia: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability 
Nisa Felicia
Punjab, Pakistan: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability 
Kashmali Khan
Philippines: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability
Redempto S. Parafina
Corruption-risk assessment of the Georgian higher education sector 
Muriel Poisson; Jacques Hallak
Promoting transparency through information: A global review of school 
report cards 
Xuejiao Joy Cheng; Kurt Moses
Achieving transparency in pro-poor education incentives
Muriel Poisson (Ed.)
Patterns of development and use of codes of conduct for teachers  
in 24 countries 
Pippa McKelvie-Sebileau178
Guidelines for the design and effective use of teacher codes of conduct
Muriel Poisson
T eacher codes: Learning from experience
Shirley van Nuland
T ransparency in education in Eastern Europe 
Arunas Plikšnys; Sylvia Kopnicka; Liliya Hrynevych; Constantine Palicarsky
Corrupt schools, corrupt universities: What can be done? 
Jacques Hallak; Muriel Poisson
Ethics in education: The role of teacher codes. Canada and South Asia 
Shirley van Nuland; B.P . Khandelwal
Governance in education: T ransparency and accountability
Jacques Hallak; Muriel Poisson (Eds)
T owards more transparent financial management: Scholarships and grants 
in Indonesia
Stephan Baines
T ransparencia en educación: Maestros en Colombia, Alimentación escolar 
en Chile
Margarita Pena and Jeannette S. Rodríguez; Carmen Luz Latorre and Paula 
Aranda
Formula funding of schools, decentralization and corruption:  
A comparative analysis
Rosalind Levačić; Peter Downes
Public expenditure tracking surveys in education 
Ritva Reinikka; Nathanael Smith
T ransparency in education: Report card in Bangladesh, quality schools 
programme in Mexico
Shahnaz Karim; Claudia A. Santizo Rodall; Enrique Cabrero Mendoza
Adverse effects of private supplementary tutoring: dimensions, 
implications and government responses 
Mark Bray
Approvisionnement en livres scolaires : Vers plus de transparence. Afrique 
francophone 
Jean-Pierre Leguéré
Combating academic fraud: T owards a culture of integrity
Max A. EcksteinThe International Institute for Educational Planning
The International Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP) is an international centre for 
advanced training and research in the field of educational planning. It was established by 
UNESCO in 1963 and is financed by UNESCO and by voluntary contributions from Member 
States. In recent years the following Member States have provided voluntary contributions to 
the Institute: Argentina, France, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland.
The Institute’s aim is to contribute to the development of education throughout the world, by 
expanding both knowledge and the supply of competent professionals in the field of educational 
planning. In this endeavour the Institute cooperates with training and research organizations 
in Member States. The IIEP Governing Board, which approves the Institute’s programme and 
budget, consists of a maximum of eight elected members and four members designated by the 
United Nations Organization and certain of its specialized agencies and institutes.
Chairperson: 
Nicholas Burnett (United Kingdom/United States of America)
Senior Fellow, Results for Development Institute, Washington DC, United States of America
Designated members:
Nina Arnhold (Germany)
Senior Education Specialist, The World Bank, Washington DC, United States of America
Srinivas Reddy (India)
Chief of the Skills and Employability Branch, International Labour Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland
Robert Jenkins (Canada)
Chief, Education and Associate Director, Programme Division, UNICEF
Elected members:
José Weinstein Cayuela (Chile)
Professor and Director Doctorate in Education, Diego Portales University, Santiago, Chile
Dina El Khawaga (Egypt) 
Director, Asfari Institute for Civil Society and Citizenship, Beirut, Lebanon
Valérie Liechti (Switzerland)
Swiss Agency for development and cooperation, Federal Department of Foreign Affairs 
(FDFA), Switzerland
Dzingai Mutumbuka (Zimbabwe)
Former Chair, Association for the Development of Education in Africa (ADEA)
Keiichi Ogawa ( Japan)
Professor and Department Chair, Graduate School of International Cooperation Studies, 
Kobe University, Japan 
Jean-Michel Séverino (France)
President, Investisseurs & Partenaires, Paris, France 
Inquiries about the Institute should be addressed to:  
The Office of the Director, International Institute for Educational Planning,  
7–9 rue Eugène Delacroix, 75116 Paris, FranceAbout the book
Although the concept of open government (OG) is increasingly applied in 
public policy around the world, there is as yet no systematized overview of OG 
implementation in the education sector, its advantages, and the possible risks.
In order to fill this gap, this book clarifies the conceptual confusion around the 
term ‘open government’ and provides a working definition for the education 
sector. It elaborates a theory of change for OG implementation in two different 
contexts: where corruption is an exception, and where corruption is the norm 
in governance. It then maps out and assesses the characteristics of 34 recent 
OG initiatives conducted in the educational field worldwide.
The book highlights that in countries with occasional corruption, OG is 
mostly used to meet stakeholders’ education-related needs, but that in 
countries with systemic corruption, participatory initiatives often target the 
implementation or monitoring of a given policy. It concludes with some 
practical recommendations for IIEP’s new research on ‘Open Government 
in Education: Learning from Experience’, launched as part of its 2018–2021 
Medium Term Strategy.
About the authors
Oksana Huss is a researcher at Leiden University, Netherlands, and co-founder 
of the Interdisciplinary Corruption Research Network. She obtained her PhD 
on political corruption in hybrid regimes at the Institute for Development and 
Peace, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany. She provides her expertise on 
open government and theories of corruption to think tanks, universities, and 
international organizations. 
Oleksandra Keudel is a PhD candidate at the Berlin Graduate School for 
Global and Transregional Studies at the Free University of Berlin, Germany, 
and a research consultant for international and civil society organizations. 
Her major research interest is local citizen participation, and she also studies 
knowledge production in hybrid regimes. 
ISBN  : 978-92-803-1337-6