ISSUE 9, 2018
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization | Mahatama Gandhi Institute ofEducation for Peace and Sustainable Development
35 Ferozshah Road, ICSSR, Building, 1
stFloor 
New Delhi 110001, INDIA
THE BLUE DOT features articles showcasing UNESCO 
MGIEP’s activities and areas of  interest. The magazine’s overarching theme is the relationship between education, peace, sustainable development and global citizenship. THE BLUE DOT’s role is to engage with readers on these issues in a fun and interactive manner. The magazine is designed to address audiences across generations and walks of  life, thereby taking thediscourse on education for peace, sustainable development and global citizenship beyond academia, civil society organisations and governments, to the actual stakeholders.
THE BLUE DOT is published biannually .PUBLISHED BY UNESCO MGIEP
SUBSCRIPTION
The Blue Dot is available free of  charge. 
To receive all future issues of  the THE BLUE DOT ,subscribe to bluedot.mgiep@unesco.org 
MANAGING EDITOR
Akriti Mehra, UNESCO MGIEP
DESIGN
Prasun Mazumdar Design | www.pmdindia.in
© UNESCO MGIEP
Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed in this magazine
do not necessarily reﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or position ofUNESCO MGIEP .
The image used on the cover of  this issue of  The Blue Dot is 
purely representational and conceptual in nature.EDITORIAL COMMITTEE
AKRITI MEHRA
Communications SpecialistANANTHA K. DURAIAPPAH
Director
NANDINI CHATTERJEE SINGH
Programme Specialist - Science of LearningISSUE 11, 2020TECH 2019  SPECIAL ISSUE
Chief Editor, UNESCO MGIEP
UNESCO MGIEP
Head of Policy , UNESCO MGIEPYOKO MOCHIZUKITHE BLUE DOT features articles showcasing UNESCO MGIEP’s activities and areas of  interest. 
The magazine’s overarching theme is the relationship between education, peace, sustainable development and global citizenship. THE BLUE DOT’s role is to engage with readers on these issues in a fun and interactive manner. The magazine is designed to address audiences across generations and walks of  life, thereby taking the discourse on education for peace, sustainable development and global citizenship beyond academia, civil society organisations and governments, to the actual stakeholders.
THE BLUE DOT is published biannually .
SUBSCRIPTION
The BLUE DOT is available free of  charge. The digital version of  the magazine can be accessed here: 
https://mgiep.unesco.org/the-bluedot
MANAGING EDITOR
Akriti Mehra, UNESCO MGIEP
EDITORIAL COMMITTEE
Anantha K. Duraiappah, UNESCO MGIEPNandini Chatterjee Singh, UNESCO MGIEPYoko Mochizuki, UNESCO MGIEP
Published in 2020 by the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization | Mahatma Gandhi 
Institute of  Education for Peace and Sustainable Development, 35 Ferozshah Road, New Delhi 110001, India ©  UNESCO MGIEP 2020
 This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of  this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of  use of  the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).
The designations employed and the presentation of  material throughout this publication do not imply the 
expression of  any opinion whatsoever on the part of  UNESCO concerning the legal status of  any country , territory , city or area or of  its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of  its frontiers or boundaries.  
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of  the authors; they are not necessarily those of
UNESCO MGIEP and do not commit the Organization.
Graphic design: Prasun Mazumdar Design | www.pmdindia.inPrinted by: Lustra Printing PressPrinted in India
ISSUE 9, 2018
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization | Mahatama Gandhi Institute ofEducation for Peace and Sustainable Development
35 Ferozshah Road, ICSSR, Building, 1
stFloor 
New Delhi 110001, INDIA
THE BLUE DOT features articles showcasing UNESCO 
MGIEP’s activities and areas of  interest. The magazine’s overarching theme is the relationship between education, peace, sustainable development and global citizenship. THE BLUE DOT’s role is to engage with readers on these issues in a fun and interactive manner. The magazine is designed to address audiences across generations and walks of  life, thereby taking thediscourse on education for peace, sustainable development and global citizenship beyond academia, civil society organisations and governments, to the actual stakeholders.
THE BLUE DOT is published biannually .PUBLISHED BY UNESCO MGIEP
SUBSCRIPTION
The Blue Dot is available free of  charge. 
To receive all future issues of  the THE BLUE DOT ,subscribe to bluedot.mgiep@unesco.org 
MANAGING EDITOR
Akriti Mehra, UNESCO MGIEP
DESIGN
Prasun Mazumdar Design | www.pmdindia.in
© UNESCO MGIEP
Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed in this magazine
do not necessarily reﬂect the ofﬁcial policy or position ofUNESCO MGIEP .
The image used on the cover of  this issue of  The Blue Dot is 
purely representational and conceptual in nature.EDITORIAL COMMITTEE
AKRITI MEHRA
Communications SpecialistANANTHA K. DURAIAPPAH
Director
NANDINI CHATTERJEE SINGH
Programme Specialist - Science of Learning
MGIEP-2020/PI/H/1 REV.1
“Look again at that dot. 
That’s here. That’s home. That’s us.
On it, everyone you love, 
everyone you know, everyone you ever heard of,
every human being who ever was, 
lived out their lives. 
The aggregate of  our joy and suffering
thousands of  con fide
nt religions,
ideologies, and economic doctrines, 
every hunter and forager, every hero and coward, 
every creator and destroyer of  civilization, 
every king and peasant, every young couple in love, 
every mother and father, hopeful child, 
inventor and explorer, every teacher of  morals,
every corrupt politician, every superstar,
every supreme leader, every saint 
and sinner in the history of  our species lived there-
on a mote of  dust suspended in a sunbeam.”
CARL SAGAN
PALE BLUE DOT: A VISION OF THE HUMAN FUTURE IN SPACEDIRECTOR’S MESSAGE
The challenges we face 
today are quite unlike those faced in the last millennium. While 
experiencing the unprecedented interconnectivity created by the Internet, we are also witnessing persistent and new disparities and tensions, alarming illiberal and undemocratic trends, and uncertainties and risks about the future of  the planet we share. Interconnected local to global challenges—ranging from climate change to violent extremism—call for education that enables learners to engage creatively and responsibly with the rapidly changing world.
The lastest edition of  the Institute’s 
annual flagship conference, Transforming Education Conference for Humanity (TECH) 2019, focused on showcasing the role of  digital technologies in enabling a shift from “transmissive pedagogies” to “transformative pedagogies” to create more peaceful and sustainable societies. Within this, the three core focus areas / sub-themes of  the conference were ‘Transformative Pedagogies for Social and Emotional Learning’ (SEL), ‘Reimagining Learning Spaces for Planetary Citizenship’ and Data, Learning & Education - Role of  Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
In the first sub-theme, on SEL, experts 
convened to discuss recent research that suggests that students need to be “socially aware” and “emotionally connected” in order to learn and for societies to flourish. Imagining 
21st Century 
Learning SpacesDIRECTOR’S
MESSAGE
Discussions also ensued on how our 
education systems can be transformed to teach SEL skills in the classroom and how the digital medium can be employed to scale SEL as well as provide for personalised learning. The second sub-theme, focused on innovative learning spaces, in which various stakeholders came together to deliberate on future classrooms, which are conducive for people to take multiple perspectives, engage in dialogue and critical reflection, and transform society through self-transformation. Lastly , the theme on AI saw debates on key issues such as individualised learning at scale – whether this is oxymoronic or a utopian reality , the possibility of  developing technology with emotion and the battle on data privacy and ownership. A unique intervention in the conference was a highly popular children’s panel on “Education today: Challenges, concerns and wish-list for the future”, in which we invited school children to voice challenges and concerns on the present education system as well as share their needs and wants for future education systems.
This “Special Issue” of  The Blue 
Dot provides a detailed account of  what transpired at TECH 2019 – towards imagining and creatinginnovative 21
st Century Learning
Spaces across the three sub-themesof  the conference. We hear fromvarious specialists on SEL, AI and thosewho have pioneered path-breakinglearning spaces towards making education fun, immersive and experiential. Amongst others, we hear from experts such as Tyralynn Frazier, Research Scientist, Center for Contemplative Science and Compassion- Based Ethics, Emory University , on “Reframing Educational Success from the Mind to the Heart: An introduction to SEE Learning; Paul Darvasi, Educator, Writer, Researcher on “The Lucid Century: How Games and Play might Help Dismantle the People Factory” and Julien Mercier, Director of  NeuroLab (FCI) at the University of  Quebec in Montreal, Canada on “Moment-by-moment measures of  affect and cognition in learning”. We have also compiled a “wish-list” from some of  the brilliant child panelists we had participating in the special children’s panel. Additionally , we have put together a summary of  the key discussions that emerged during the catalytic sessions, pre-conference workshops and policy-forum. I do hope you will enjoy reading this issue – and trust that it will provide you enoughmotivation to join us for TECH 2020as we continue our quest to transformeducation for humanity towards Education2030 – details forthcoming on our brandwebsite: mgiep.unesco.org .
ANANTHA KUMAR DURAIAPPAH
Director, UNESCO MGIEPUNESCO MGIEP’S ANNUAL FLAGSHIP CONFERENCE –  
TECH 2019
03
TECH 2019
Transforming 
Education Conference for Humanity 
(TECH):
December 10-12, 2019
VISAKHAPATNAM CITY ,
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIATECH 2019
Building on the success of TECH 2017 and 2018, TECH 2019, 
held in partnership with the State Government of Andhra Pradesh, India, SUCCESSFULLY SHOWCASED THE ROLE OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES IN ENABLING A SHIFT FROM “TRANSMISSIVE PEDAGOGIES” TO “TRANSFORMATIVE PEDAGOGIES” TO CREATE MORE PEACEFUL AND SUSTAINABLE SOCIETIES with over 1,000 diverse stakeholders coming together from close to 30 countries in Vizag from December 10-12, 2020 to deliberate on the role of digital pedagogies in building sustainable societies.KEY HIGHLIGHTS: 
1,000 diverse stakeholders
Several pre-conference capacity building workshops for over 500 teachers from 6 nationalitiesPolicy Forum on Digital Learning with pedagogues and industry leaders from 12 countries who came together to deliberate on the policy interventions required on the use of technologyKeynotes12 Catalytic Sessions Highly engaging Disruptor’ s Panel on “Agenda for Rethinking Education”Special Children’ s Panel titled “Education T oday: Challenges, Concerns and Wishlist for the Future” TECH T alk by Director, UNESCO MGIEP••
•
•
•• 
• •
05
Director’ s Message  
• Imagining 21st Century Learning Spaces
By Anantha Kumar Duraiappah | Director, UNESCO MGIEP
TECH 2019             
• Transforming Education Conference for H umanity
(TECH): Decem
ber 10-12, 2019CONTENTS
TECH 2019  SPECIAL ISSUE
PRE-CONFERENCE WORKSHOPS
• Digital T echnology for Teacher Practice
• Pr
oject Based Learnin g and Social Emotional
L
earning
•SEL a t Pre-Conference Workshop, 2019
• 
UNESCO MGIEP Strengthens Compassion Trainin g
at
 2 Indian Univer sities0601
021640 74
POLICY FORUM
• Policy Forum on Digital Learning at TECH 2019
SEL
• Social and Emotional L earning: Why teacher s need it
mor
e than anyone else!EDUCATION - 
TODAY'S CHALLENGES, CONCERNS AND WISHLIST FOR THE FUTURE 110
0THEME III : DATA, LEARNING AND 
EDUCATION - ROLE OF AI
• Session Desc riptors
Expert Pieces
• A Vision of AI for Joyful Education: Researc h Goals
t
o Avert Danger and Maximize Benefits By Lisa Einstein 
& Chris Piech
• Moment-by-Moment Measures of Aff ect and
Cognition 
in Learning By Julien Mercier 
• AI t
o Improve Unique Human Abilities By M. Ehsan 
Hoque •
 Should Tech be Held Accountable for the Forseea ble
M
isuse By Dan ShefEt
• Learning Workflow Reimagined: AI-power ed
L
earning Solution Approach By Roy Saurabh
• Scaling Social Emotional and Ethical Learning t o
M
eet Global Challenges: Compassionate Inte grity
T
raining Moves to the Internet By Shane O'Connor
• Transformative Pedagogies and SEL: The Challeng es
f
or Education and Digital Citizenship in Aotearoa Ne w
Zealand 
By Stuart McNaughtonTHEME II : REIMAGINING LEARNING SPACES 
FOR PLANETARY CITIZENSHIP
• Session Desc riptors
Expert Pieces
• Beyond Access: Universal Design for Learnin g (UDL)
and Digital T
ools for Meaningful Inclusion By Kavita 
Rao 
• V
ideo Games Are Not Educational Technology By
Matthew Farber
•Schools Must Prioritize Fostering Learner Agency By 
Monisha Bajaj 
• Kids Want to Play Video Games, but Do They Wan t
to
 Play Educational Video Games? By Elisa Navarro 
Chinchilla•
 Reimagining Science Teaching for Low -income
Childr
en By Nirmal Govindraju
• UNESCO MGIEP TECH 2019 - CASE STUDY 42
By Olivier Crouzet•
 The Ludic Century: How Games and Play might He lp
Disman
tle the People Factory By Paul DarvasiTHEME I : TRANSFORMATIVE   PEDAGOGIES 
FOR SEL
• Session Desc riptors
Expert Pieces
• Some Thou ghts On Adolescent Socioemotional
L
earning (SEL) In Quebec By Maryse Lassonde
• Restorative Justice and Honouring Personal Ag ency
By
 Shelja Sen
• Reframing Educational Success from the Mind to t he
H
eart: an Introduction to SEE Learning By Tyralynn 
Frazier
• TECH Extended Conversations on SEL
• Game-Based Courses – Exploring New Par adigms in
G
ame-Based Learning7At the end of  the sessions, some of  the participant feedback was as follows:
Although many teachers had a slow and hesitant start; by the end 
of  the workshop, all of  them had used at least two of  the three tools covered in the workshop. Teachers of  maths, biology , history created Kahoot quizzes and got everyone to play them online. Many others displayed their wordclouds and concept maps on the projector. Some teachers who were familiar with some of  these tools supported other teachers in practicing them. 
Although teachers talked about infrastructural barriers that may 
prevent them from using some of  these tools in their classroom, they were also thrilled with the possibilities of  making their classrooms more engaging and fun. The workshop definitely created enthusiasm amongst the community to learn and experiment more! 
‘I learned something which is new to me. I am more excited to use these tools in my teaching.’
‘I want to learn how to create Google docs, how to create a website and how to prepare content that suits the needs of the 
students using digital technology apart from Kahoot & Mind maps.’
‘I would like to develop the skill to create web page, php and online multiple questions and answers, Adobe Photoshop, Primer 
Pro, After Effects, animations.’
I learnt about Kahoot, word cloud and Collaborate through Collabrify but since our students did not have access to computers 
during the sessions, it was difficult to use these tools. However, we can show them in the Computer lab and ask them to use the tools and do their homework.’Feedback from ParticipantsPRE-CONFERENCE WORKSHOP
Digital Technology for
T eacher Practice
The workshop ‘Digital technologies for teaching practice’ 
was part of  a larger course called ‘Becoming a 21st Century 
Teacher: Leveraging digital pedagogies for teaching 
practice’ being developed by UNESCO MGIEP for pre-service and in-service teachers across the globe.The intent of  this workshop was to inspire teachers from Andhra Pradesh Government schools and Jawarhar Navodaya Vidyalaya to use technology in their teaching practice. The daylong workshop was conducted twice for two different sets of  teachers. The workshop followed two different formats: A self-learning format to introduce teachers to the concept of  self-paced online learning and an interactive workshop format, which most teachers are used to and prefer. The workshop was conducted by seasoned facilitators from University of  Texas and University of  Michigan with expertise in education technologies.
It was noteworthy that only 4-5 out of  104 teachers had ever taken 
an online course before the workshop. While initially , many teachers were unclear about how to engage with a MOOC, they all enrolled in the course from their laptops and mobile phones with support from volunteers.
Although participating teachers gave a high rating on overall 
content, presentation and relevance of  the workshop (refer to the graph below), their favourite parts were the ones where they learnt new open source tools for their classroom. These included Kahoot – for classroom quizzes, word it out – for making Wordclouds, andcollabrify map for making concept maps.PRE-CONFERENCE
WORKSHOP
WORKSHOP SUMMARY: 
Date : December 8-9, 2019
Number of Participants : 104Facilitators : Cathie Norris, Elliot SolowayCo-facilitators : Shraddha Rawat, Akash Saini, 
Robin Sharma (UNESCO MGIEP)
Venue : Gitam University , Visakhapatnam City , 
State of Andhra Pradesh3
09SEL at Pre-Conference 
W orkshop, TECH 2019
UNESCO MGIEP’s mandate is to mainstream Social and 
Emotional Learning (SEL) in education systems, and the Institute focuses on empowering teachers with key SEL tools and strategies.
During TECH 2019, two pre-conference workshops were conducted 
by UNESCO MGIEP's Rethinking Learning team. The focus of  the workshop was to help teachers understand the rationale of  SEL, and to familiarize them with MGIEP’s SEL programs which are designed for students between 12-14 years using an issue based approach. The uniquefeature of  MGIEP’s SEL programs is that the social and emotionalcompetencies are embedded in knowledge curricula, which makesthem easy to implement in the classroom.
The first workshop was conducted by Ms. Renuka Rautela and Ms. 
Aditi Pathak from UNESCO MGIEP with a group of   Jawahar Navodaya Vidhyalaya (JNV) teachers. The teachers were invited as part of  an ongoing programme at the Institute- the MyDream Project. The second workshop was a day-long workshop for teachers from the State of  Andhra Pradesh as well as other interested participants from TECH. The workshop was conducted by Ms. Anurati Srivastva, Ms. Renuka Rautela and Ms. Aditi Pathak.
The teachers were also introduced to the two digital courses 
of  UNESCO MGIEP that build SEL skills, including Global Citizenship and Digital Intercultural Exchange (DICE). Global Citizenship curricula essentially integrates key SEL skills of   Empathy , Mindfulness, Critical Inquiry and Compassion with contemporary issues of  global importance such as Migration, Democracy , Refugee Crisis, Citizenship rights and duties, Identity and Violence. DICE, on the other hand, focuses on helping students take multiple perspectives and reflect on their biases. 
As part of  the course, teachers are trained on how to encourage 
‘dialogue’ or more open conversations around ‘self ’, ‘others’ and the ‘world’ within the classrooms and help students understand the ‘different other’. Both the courses are rendered on MGIEP's indigenously developed platform, FramerSpace (FS). FS is an anonymised platform and is compliant to the most stringent Data privacy & ownership laws such as GDPR & COPPA. Also, FS is one of  the very few platforms that helps build Emotional Intelligence in conjunction with Cognitive Intelligence in learners, leveraging the latest in Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Neurosciences. 
The workshop with the educators  ended on a high note with 
participating teachers sharing their feedback and learning. Most of  the teachers acknowledged the need to integrate SEL in their classroom and shared the critical requirement to organise similar training workshops. PRE-CONFERENCE WORKSHOPPRE-CONFERENCE
WORKSHOPPRE-CONFERENCE
WORKSHOP
Project Based Learning and 
Social Emotional Learning
‘The MyDream Project’ is a collaborative project of  
Samsung, UNESCO MGIEP , and the Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) school system. The project aims to engage students in Mathematics and Science through project based learning along with improving their social emotional skills.  A two-day TECH pre-conference workshop was conducted for JNV teachers on December 8 & 9, 2019 at GITAM University , Visakhapatnam. The objective of  the workshop was to support teachers to integrate activity based learning, project based learning, and social emotional learning (SEL) into their classrooms. A total of  52 teachers from 31 JNVs attended the workshop.
The workshop started with a brief  presentation about the findings 
from the need assessment phase of  the project in terms of  academic difficulties and areas that need SEL support. Teachers were then engaged in an energetic and interactive session about activity based learning facilitated by Mr. Manish Jain (Associate Teaching Professor, IIT Gandhinagar). Through stories and activities, Mr . Jain demonstrated that we are often unable to use knowledge from the textbooks in real life situations. He urged the teachers to revise their approach towards teaching and bring more of  the real world into their classrooms. 
During the third session, Dr. Matthew Farber (Assistant Professor, 
University of  Northern Colorado) introduced teachers to project based learning. While students often engage in projects at the end of  the lesson, Dr. Farber advocated for engaging students in projects throughout the teaching and learning process. He demonstrated the use of  various teaching techniques that can be paired with project work such as questioning, storytelling, and role-playing. The last session by Ms. Renuka Rautela and Ms. Aditi Pathak discussed the importance of  social and emotional learning. With the help of  mindfulness activities, the teachers experienced MGIEP’s approach towards SEL. 
The following key topics were covered as part of the workshop: 
Neuroscience Of Learning
SEL Approaches Around
The GlobeDigital Pedagogies 
Understanding UNESCO MGIEP’ s SEL framework- EMCCSimple SEL activities and 
games for classroom
011UNESCO MGIEP 
Strengthens Compassion Training at  2 Indian Universities
The MGIEP Youth Programme conducted two back-to-
back capacity-building workshops on the Compassionate Integrity Training (CIT) course for over 80 faculty and senior 
staff  from GITAM University (Andhra Pradesh) and KIIT/KISS Universities (Orissa) at the Transforming Conference Education for Humanity (TECH).
The CIT course developed by Life University (USA) is a multi-part 
online social-emotional learning (SEL) programme that cultivates basic human values as skills for the purpose of  increasing individual, social and environmental flourishing.
UNESCO MGIEP and Life University entered into a partnership 
in May 2019 to develop an online self-directed learning version of  CIT that would mainstream SEL by allowing large numbers of  youth to undertake the high-quality course. MGIEP conducted the 2 workshops in collaboration with Centre for Compassion Integrity and Secular Ethics (CCISE) of  Life University , USA.
The first workshop for GITAM University , attended by 25 GITAM 
Faculty and 20 teachers from the State Government of  Andhra Pradesh Ministry of  Education, was a pre-conference activity for the 2019 TECH event in Visakhapatnam City , Andhra Pradesh, India. The second workshop was held for 30 faculty and students from the Kalinga Institute of  Industrial Technology (KIIT) and the Kalinga Institute of  Social Sciences (KISS) based in Bhubaneshwar City , India.
Participants at the workshop were engaged in a mindful dialogue and 
underwent a 20-hour training spread over 3 days covering ten core skills, which included empathy , compassion and mindfulness.The workshops are designed as a journey professing through skills for self-cultivation to engage in systems to understand the wicked and the complex problems plaguing the world community . 
PRE-CONFERENCE
WORKSHOP
The trainees took guided meditations, held mindful dialogues, and captured reflective writing for an embodied understanding of  the skills. The workshops were facilitated by Mr Shane O’Connor from Life University and Mr Shankar Musafir from UNESCO MGIEP .MGIEP is currently developing a SEL++ course which is based on the current CIT course content but will be available online in a self-directed learning model. 
2
Ethical
Mindfulness1
Calming
Body & Mind
3
Emotional
Awareness
4
 Self-
CompassionCOMPASSION INTEGRITY  TRAINING (CIT)
TEN CORE SKILLS
5 
Impartiality &
Common
Humanity7
Empathic
Concern8
Compassion
6
Forgiveness
& Gratitude10
Engaging With
Discernment
9
Appreciating
InterdependencePRE-CONFERENCE WORKSHOP13Policy Forum on 
Digital Learning 
at TECH 2019POLICY FORUM
Group of Governments come together to 
promote wise, innovative and ethical use of 
digital technology in education at the Policy 
Forum on Digital Learning at TECH 2019
Building on the Vizag Declaration on Guidelines for Digital 
Learning adopted at TECH 2018, UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi 
Institute of  Education for Peace and Sustainable Development 
(MGIEP) organized a Policy Forum on Digital Learning on 9 
December 2019 in Visakhapatnam City , State of  Andhra Pradesh, 
India, ahead of  TECH 2019. The Forum was attended 
by representatives from 13 countries such as India, 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, 
New Zealand, South Africa and Sweden, out of  which nine 
countries were officially represented. Other participants 
included scholars from the fields of  digital and games based 
learning, Universal Design for Learning (UDL) and comparative and 
international education, select educational technology companies 
such as Dell, Microsoft, Samsung as well as 15 school teachers from 
India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Maldives who were leading two 
of  MGIEP’s digital Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) projects. 
The Policy Forum aimed at raising awareness about the current state 
and future prospects of  the use of  digital technology in education, 
including the role of  Artificial Intelligence (AI) in supporting 
teaching and learning, and exploring the feasibility of  forming a 
voluntary group of  countries committed to the wise, innovative and 
ethical use of  digital technology in education.
Ms. Tota Mukherjee, Former Indian Ambassador to UNESCO 
and Prof  Yusuke Morita, Associate Professor of  Waseda University , 
Tokyo, Japan, served as Co-Chairs of  the Policy Forum. Prof  Morita 
was also the official representative of  Japan in the Forum. The 
forum was inaugurated by Dr. Anantha Duraiappah, Director of  
UNESCO MGIEP . In his opening remarks, Dr. Duraiappah stated  
“We are proud to be joined by the participants in the 
Policy Forum for TECH 2019. This platform reinstates our 
commitment to transforming the educational landscape to embrace digital pedagogies by collaborating with our 
eminent stakeholders. Such discussions are imperative 
to drive awareness about digital technology and leads 
UNESCO MGIEP to get closer to SDG 4 of  providing 
quality education. The world is changing at a brisk pace 
and through these conversations education systems will 
prepare learners and educators for both the changes and 
the challenges of  the 21st century”.
Following the inauguration, country representatives made a brief  
presentation on the state of  digital learning in their respective 
countries probing 1) the current national policies, strategies and 
action plans on digital learning; 2) challenges related to digital 
learning, specifically on a) hardware (availability of  adequate 
infrastructure and equipment), b) software (access to high quality 
content and learning platforms), and c) teacher capacity and 
training, and d) nature and purpose of  digital educational resources 
that are already being used in schools. The presentations also laid out 
areas of  support needed from UNESCO MGIEP and international 
cooperation to meet the national educational priorities of  countries. 
It was interesting to note that representatives from Quebec shared 
its Digital Competency Framework, which provided a roadmap for 
digitalization efforts in education and teacher training, an inspiring 
case in point for many countries. 
The presentations provided a critical overview of  the 
state of  digital education in each country , whether it 
served an economic, instrumentalist purpose or whether 
it was more oriented towards enhancing individual and 
collective well-being and democratic principles, as well 
as its unique challenges and trends. While some countries 
had an advantage of  having better access to physical hardware and 
infrastructure, availability of  good quality content and learning 
platforms poses a challenge to many countries. A clear need for 
better equipped teachers—who are pedagogically confident in 
meaningfully employing digital learning in their school—was felt 
across countries from global north and south. Following country presentations, MGIEP presented brief  summaries 
of  two recent publications that were released at the 40th UNESCO 
General Conference in November 2019. Dr. Yoko Mochizuki, 
head of  MGIEP’s Rethinking Policy Programme, presented the 
findings of  ‘Rethinking Pedagogy- Exploring the Potential of  Digital 
Technology in Achieving Quality Education’ and Dr. Duraiappah 
gave an overview of  the Industry Guidelines for Digital Learning 
that was created to support developers of  digital learning resources 
and games to create pedagogically sound, high quality learning 
products that do not compromise on the fun element. Dr. Nandini 
Chatterjee, Head of  Rethinking Learning at MGIEP , presented an 
overview of  the pilot tests of  MGIEP’s two digital learning projects 
on global citizenship—Digital Intercultural Dialogue (DICE) and 
Global Citizenship—aimed at middle school adolescents. 
This led to an animated presentation by lawyer Dan Shefet, Adviser 
to the Council of  Europe on the Internet Ombudsman, about the 
legal and ethical challenges to digitalization of  education through 
possible future scenarios. He flagged concerns related to issues of  
data privacy , ownership and control, especially of  minor students, 
which need be deliberated and debated at length before any large-
scale adoption or endorsement of  digital learning platforms. 
Experts from the field of  universal design for learning, human-rights 
based and gender sensitive education, game-based learning offered 
their insights using examples from their fields in addressing some of  
those concerns.
The Policy Forum concluded with the co-drafting of  the Terms 
of  Reference (TOR) of  the Group of  Governments and Other 
Relevant Stakeholders on Social-Emotional and Digital Learning. 
The countries offered their inputs to make the TOR relevant to their 
country-context and priorities. The Group would be informal 
and voluntary in nature, and explore joint activities to 
promote the wise, innovative and ethical use of  digital 
technology as a new dimension in achieving SDG 4—
ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and 
enhancing lifelong learning opportunities for all. The 
Group came into effect officially in 2020, and the next Policy Forum 
is being planned for the latter half  of  2020. POLICY FORUM
The presentations gave way to enriching 
discussions about the role and nature of 
technology that would be suitable to address 
the growing concerns about quality , equity , 
inclusion, innovation and market-driven skills 
development amongst learners.15SEL
Introduction
When a smiling, amusing face approaches a crying infant, the 
chances that the weeping stops and the child reciprocates with a smile, is high. Similarly , the infectious power of  a yawn is well known. 
Research from the neurosciences shows that humans and other 
primates have mirror neurons that simulate the action and emotions of  others, and give them the impulse to feel and act accordingly
1. 
Supporting research from evolutionary biology and social cognition have reaffirmed that the ‘ability to mirror’ is necessary and important to understand and empathise with others, and is a crucial aspect of  human social behaviour
1.
As much as this revelation is fascinating, it also has its downfalls. Recent research from learning, behaviour and relationships reported that teacher relationships with students impact not just classroom learning but also student well-being. For instance, a recent research study published in the Journal for Health and Social behavior examined the relationship between classroom environment and student mental health
2. Drawing from a national sample of  10,000 first 
graders and their teachers, the researchers examined how classroom features affected first grade learning. Some of  the features the study examined were - student attention, fights and friendships in classrooms, presence and absence of  adequate resources as well as  teacher stress. The results of  the study were shocking! The study found that teachers who reported higher levels of  stress had more students in their classrooms with mental health problems. 
Surprising as it might be, the research concluded that stress was 
contagious
2. Similar results from another study examined the link between teacher burnout and student stress in Canadian students of  grades 4 and 7, and found that students with high cortisol levels (cortisol is a hormone that is indicative of  stress levels in animals) corresponded to teachers who reported higher burn out rate
3. 
Both these studies strongly suggest that teachers communicate their stress to their students, hampering their social and emotional well-being, which further impacts their academic development and progress.
Having said this, it cannot be denied that teaching is one 
of  the most challenging, demanding and stressful professions in the human service industry
4. Teachers have 
long working hours, rigid-inflexible calendars, and often carry school work back home. In many parts of  the world, a teacher’s work- life balance is extremely poor. Teachers are required to  not only complete academic work, manage complex classroom behaviours, ensure their own professional development, but also fulfill administrative responsibilities, organise parent-teacher interactions and of  course  live their personal lives. Amidst these and other similar expectations, the likelihood of  a teacher to be stressed is indeed very high, with their own social and emotional needs compromised.
T eachers need SEL:  T eacher and Student wellbeing
Navigating the teaching profession is  difficult and stressful and  demands support to manage both social and emotional well-being. Teachers need to be equipped with both knowledge and skills that can support them to filter their stress and anxiety , and calm them in times of  need. Research also supports this argument, and shows that empowering  teachers with social and emotional learning competencies  better equips them to navigate challenging times
5. 
Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) can be described as learning that allows all learners  to identify and navigate emotions, practice mindful engagement and exhibit prosocial behaviour  for human flourishing towards a peaceful and sustainable planet.
6 
Teachers need to be equipped with SEL so that they can create healthy and safe learning environments and promote human flourishing in their classrooms. Teachers with high SEC (social and emotional competencies) can recognize and manage their own emotions as well as understand how their emotional responses impact others, especially their students. Such teachers also know how to build strong, supportive relationships with students, colleagues, and parents, deal effectively with conflict and set firm but respectful class norms
7. 
SEL at UNESCO MGIEP  
Realizing the urgent need for continuous and comprehensive SEL support for teachers, UNESCO MGIEP  is developing SEL courses and training for teachers. 
The programs will be designed around MGIEP’s framework for SEL 
and focus on empowering teachers with the knowledge and skills of  SEL, and support them with tools and strategies that can help them navigate personal and professional challenges.While empathy and compassion are the basis for human connections, critical inquiry abilities are required to develop a rational temperament to realise a compassionate society . Necessary for learning all of  the above is the training of  mindfulness, which is the ability to cultivate conscious awareness of  attention, emotion and thought
8.
In keeping with MGIEP’s focus on digital pedagogies, teacher training programs will be designed on MGIEP’s indigenous learning and interactive platform, FramerSpace and will be freely available for teachers across all member states. SEL
Social and Emotional 
Learning: Why teachers need it more than anyone else!
Aditi Pathak | DIGITAL INTERCULTURAL EXCHANGE SPECIALIST
Renuka Rautela | SEL CO-ORDINATOR
1. Gallese, V ., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of  mind-reading. Trends in cognitive sciences, 2(12), 493-501.2. Milkie, M. A., & Warner, C. H. (2011). How Does the Classroom Learning Environment Affect Children's Mental Health?. Journal ofHealth and Social Behavior, 52(1), 3. Oberle, E., & Schonert-Reichl, K. A. (2016) Social Science & Medicine, 159, 30-37.4. Chris Kyriacou, “Teacher Stress: Directions for Future Research,” Educational Review 53 (2010): 27–35, doi: 10.1080/00131910120033628.5. “Why Teachers Need Social-Emotional Skills,” n.d.; Patricia A. Jennings and Mark T . Greenberg, “The Prosocial Classroom: Teacher Social and Emotional Competence in Relation to Student and Classroom Outcomes,” Review of  Educational Research 79 (2009): 491–525, doi: 10.3102/0034654308325693 (quote p. 492).6. Singh and Duraiappah, (2019) EMC2 – a social and emotionallearning framework to build human flourishing. Position paper, UNESCO MGIEP .7. Eileen G. Merritt et al., “The Contribution of  Teachers’ Emotional Support to Children’s Social Behaviors and Self-Regulatory Skills in First Grade,” School Psychology Review 41 (2012): 141–598. Asah and Singh (2019).SEL for SDGs: Why Social and Emotional Learning is necessary to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Blue Dot. Retrieved from https://mgiep.unesco.org/article/sel-for-sdgs-why-social-and-emotional-learning-is-necessary-to-achieve-the-sustainable-development-goals9. Compassion Integrity Training, (School of  Secular Ethics and Contemplative Science, Life University , 2017)10. Williams, J. M. G., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2013). Mindfulness: Diverse perspectives on its meaning, origins and applications. Routledge.11. Compassion Integrity Training, (School of  Secular Ethics and Contemplative Science, Life University ,2017)12. “What is inquiry oriented Education”, School of  ThinQ,2014
REFERENCEST o read more about the recently concluded Teacher training workshop at the 
Transforming Conference Education for Humanity (TECH) 2019, please refer to the section on pre-conference workshops.THE CORE FEATURES OF MGIEP’S SEL FRAMEWORK EMC2
Empathy:     
Ability to understand the emotions, thoughts, and motivations of 
another and to resonate with them9.
Mindfulness: 
The awareness that arises from paying attention to the experience 
of right now, non-judgmentally10. 
Compassion: 
The intent to alleviate someone from her/his suffering or distress, 
and using one’ s discernment to act accordingly11. 
Critical  Inquiry: 
The process of finding out about a concept, phenomena or 
claim, through one’ s own observation, experience, thinking, reasoning and judgement
12. 17
TransformativeTransformative
PedagogiesPedagogies
for SELfor SELTHEME I :
Bhishmadev Chakrabarti,
Professor of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Reading
Elliot Soloway , 
Professor, Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan
Emiliana Rodriguez, 
Co-Founder and Education Director, AtentaMente, Mexico
Kimberly A. Schonert-Reichl,
Applied Developmental Psychologist and Professor, University of British Columbia
Maryse Lassonde, 
President, Conseil superieur de l’Education, Government of Quebec
Nandini Chatterjee Singh,
Programme Specialist,Science of Learning, UNESCO MGIEP
Olivier Houde,
Administrateur de l’Institut Universitaire de France (IUF)
RS Mann, 
Additional Director General National Cadet Corps
Shelja Sen, 
Child & Adolescent Psychologist & Family Therapist, Children First
Tyralynn Frazier,
Ph.D., Research Scientist, Center for Contemplative Science and Compassion-Based Ethics, Emory UniversityCATALYTIC SPEAKERS:
KEYNOTE: 
Well-being is a Skill | Richard Davidson, 
William James and Vilas Research Professor of Psychology and Psychiatry and Founder & Director of the Center for Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin-Madison
CATALYTIC SESSIONS:The Social and Emotional Brain and Its Role 
in Learning
SEL for T eachers – Empowering T eachers 
with SEL for Self and the Classroom 
Gamestorming CurriculaSEL Programs can address Anxiety , Stress 
and Violence in the Classroom – The Case for Adolescents
The need for resilient and adaptive individuals to rapidly changing environments is the need of the 
hour. RECENT RESEARCH HAS DEMONSTRATED THAT STUDENTS NEED TO BE “SOCIALLY AW ARE” AND “EMOTIONALLY -CONNECTED” IN ORDER TO LEARN AND FOR SOCIETIES TO FLOURISH. That SEL skills can now be explicitly taught in the classroom has also been demonstrated. UNESCO MGIEP seeks to promote the idea that SEL is not only building both emotional and intellectual intelligence but is key to achieving peaceful and sustainable societies and this can be delivered to all learners through the use of innovative technologies.19CATALYTIC SESSION NO. 1
The Social and 
Emotional Brain 
and its 
Role in Learning 
Accumulating neuroscience research now shows that in 
order to learn, it is necessary for the brain to be ‘socially 
connected’ and ‘emotionally engaged’. It is therefore 
critical that this new knowledge on how children learn 
inform both the content and processes of  learning in both 
formal and informal spaces and guide classroom practices. 
In this session, speakers from the field of  neuroscience, 
developmental psychology and content creators were invited 
to share research and discuss the relation between the social 
and emotional brain and learning across different ages.  The 
session was moderated by Dr. Nandini Chatterjee Singh 
from UNESCO MGIEP .CATALYTIC SESSION NO: 4 
SEL for
Teachers  
Empowering T eachers 
with SEL for Self and the 
Classroom
One of  the most complex jobs in the world is that of  
a classroom teacher, which can only be compared to a 
medical staff inside an emergency room during a natural 
disaster. This is an observation made by Lee S. Shulman, 
an educational psychologist. In addition to training an 
inquiring young mind, there are a multitude of  stressors in a 
teacher’s life, ranging from the less talked of  administrative 
roles such as marking attendance or invigilating an 
examination; to more managerial ones such as designing 
and executing effective lessons; to leadership roles such 
as mentoring new teachers and providing expertise. This 
range of  responsibilities and the constant narrative to create 
life-long learners leads to more anxious and stressed out 
teachers with low self-efficacy and poor work life balance. 
Rightfully said, teachers’ own social-emotional competence 
and well-being is compromised. It is then very natural for 
this stress and aggression to transcend to classroom spaces 
where students are the receiver of  this burnout. In this 
session, we invited speakers from the fields of  neuroscience, 
SEL and learning spaces to share classroom practices and 
research that advocates the need for teachers with SEL 
attitudes for self  and the classroomCATALYTIC SESSION NO: 7 
SEL through 
Digital Games 
Harnessing the Power of 
Digital Interaction and Play 
to T each and Assess SEL
The role of  play in learning has been under emphasised. 
Over the last decade, a large body of  research in the field 
of  games and learning has established the need for fun and 
motivation in learning. From games that encourage physical 
movement to games that restrict it, games have seen their 
own transformation. Harnessing the intrinsic potential for 
motivation to play , this session highlighted the role of  games 
not only for experience but also for assessment and inter -
vention. The MGIEP Games for Learning team discussed 
the enormous potential of  digital games as a medium to 
build student agency by participating in learning experi-
ences where they can relate, evaluate, take decisions, solve 
problems, collaborate and most importantly discover their 
creativity .CATALYTIC SESSION NO: 10
SEL Programs 
can Address 
Anxiety, Stress, 
Violence in the 
Classrooms  
The Case for Adolescents
While adolescence is a period of  tremendous learning, 
exploration, and opportunity , it is also a time when vulner -
ability to behavioral and health problems is at its peak with 
extended negative consequences that last into adulthood.  
According to a recent WHO report, nearly 25 million chil-
dren worldwide have anxiety and stress and are at risk for 
depression. This is fast leading to a distorted reality wherein 
well-being of  children is compromised. With the motivation 
to understand the potential of  SEL programs to support 
adolescents in navigating this difficult time and harnessing 
their true potential, the session brought together experts 
from the field of  psychology , Neuroscience, education and 
youth services to shed more light on the issue at disposal. 
The session was moderated by Dr Shelja Sen, Child Psy-
chologist and family therapist.SESSION DESCRIPTOS
SESSION
DESCRIPTORS21Maryse Lassonde,
President, Conseil supérieur de l’éducation du 
Québec (Quebec Higher Council of Education)
maryse.lassonde@cse.gouv.qc.ca
Nadine Forget-Dubois, Research professionalSome Thoughts On
Adolescent 
Socioemotional
Learning (SEL) In Quebec
MARYSE LASSONDE & NADINE FORGET-DUBOIS
EXPERT
PIECESEXPERT PIECES
period (Arain et al., 2013). More importantly , several studies have 
demonstrated considerable development of  the pre-frontal cortex 
during adolescence (Shaw et al., 2009), a region subserving the 
so-called executive functions, which are thought to underline several 
socioemotional competencies (Corcoran and Slavin, 2016). 
Considering these important brain changes, one would expect 
that emotional control and well-being should improve during 
adolescence. However, among children and adolescents aged 5 to 
19 years, the annual prevalence of  all mental disorders estimated 
from Canadian and American population surveys using validated 
diagnostic instruments remains high over the age range (14%, Boyle 
and Georgiades, 2010). In view of  these alarming results, several 
educational initiatives have been launched in order to improve 
socioemotional adjustment.  
In Canada, education is under provincial jurisdiction and any 
educational intervention aimed at addressing socioemotional 
maladjustment must take into account the epidemiological 
data pertaining to its provincial authority .  In this context, the 
Quebec high school youth health survey (Institut de la statistique 
du Québec, 2018) examined the mental health and social 
adjustment of  62,000 teenagers representative of  Quebec regions, 
socioeconomical status and languages (French and English). 
Regarding mental health, the proportion of  students with a high 
level of  psychological distress has increased since 2010-2011, from 
21% to 29%, with more girls than boys showing a high level of  
psychological distress. Among high school students, 17% reported 
physician-confirmed anxiety , 6% depression, 2.2% eating disorders 
and 23% ADHD. About 38% of  high school students exhibited at 
least one direct aggression behaviour and 65% exhibited indirect 
aggression.  According to this survey (Institut de la statistique du 
Québec, 2018, p. 159), "The prevalence of  anxiety disorders, Background
Adolescent years are characterized by increased self-awareness, 
increased importance and complexity of  peer relationships, 
and improved understanding of  others (Pfeifer and Blakemore, 
2009). Adolescence is also characterized by the growing need 
for independence and issues related to educational achievement. 
During this period, young people are increasingly exposed to 
phenomena such as violence, bullying or alcohol and drug use 
that may be risk factors for their mental health. It is also during 
this period that the first manifestations of  anxiety , depression, 
eating disorders, psychosis and substance abuse usually appear 
(Commonwealth Department of  Health and Aged Care, 2000).
In parallel, numerous neuroanatomical changes occur during this 
timeframe that may provide some insight into brain behaviour 
relationships. Indeed, notwithstanding the fact that the human 
cortex develops early in ontogenesis, the overall maximum cortical 
volume occurs between ages 8 to 10, followed by a gradual decrease 
in overall thickness during adolescence (Paquette et al, in press), 
with white matter exhibiting a steady linear increase in the same Adolescence
Behaviour 
Brain 
Social and Emotional 
InterventionsInformation and 
Communication 
Technologies 
Applicability 
ImplementationKeywords
Adolescence is characterized by increased importance 
and complexity of peer relationships. Neuroanatomical 
changes also occur during this period and include rapid 
development of the prefrontal cortex, a region associated 
with executive functions, which are thought to underlie 
socioemotional competencies.  Although well-being could 
be expected to improve with these changes, children and 
adolescents show high rates of mental disorders.  In Quebec 
(Canada), already high levels of psychological distress 
have worsened during the last decade, affecting 29% of 
students, especially girls.  Other mental disorders also show 
high prevalence.  The Quebec government consequently 
has launched several programs over the years, promoting 
a positive school climate and emotional skills training, 
but their implementation has proven difficult.  Thus, the 
Quebec Higher Council of Education has issued a series of 
recommendations: consider students in their entirety as 
flourishing human beings; implement systemic, school and 
community-wide SEL approaches; train the entire school 
staff in managing students' emotions and well-being; and 
develop more effective collaboration with social services 
and community organizations.  Notably, SEL programs, 
including prosocial videogames, show promise in fostering 
empathy and SEL.  Implementing systemic programs is, 
however, a long-term, complex process and caution is 
warranted.Abstract
23depression, eating disorders and ADHD 
has been increasing since 2010-2011. Similarly , medication for anxiety or depression, as well as that taken to calm down or focus, is on the rise. The same can be said about the relative proportion of  students with high psychological distress at all levels of  secondary school. Such increases are observed elsewhere in the world." [Personal translation]
Current Interventions
In order to counteract the relatively high incidence of  socioemotional problems observed in these population studies, the province of  Quebec has launched a series of  educational interventions over the years. The 20-year+ longitudinal study of  Quebec children initiated by Tremblay and collaborators in 1996 indicates that the mechanisms that lead to socioemotional deficits are intergenerational and based on complex genetic and environmental interactions, including epigenetic mechanisms.  This study has also demonstrated that prevention of  these deficits requires early and long-term interventions with both parents and child (Tremblay , 2010).  Indeed, social and emotional skills do not relate solely to a person's genetic inheritance but depend essentially on abilities learned through life experience (Gendron, 2007), particularly through the experiences that the child has at school.
Mastering a set of  skills related to the 
expression, understanding and control of  emotions (social and emotional skills) is an important protective factor identified by several researchers (Boncu et al., 2017; Durlak et al, 2015, OECD, 2015). In addition, meta-analysis studies have shown that social and emotional learning programs also increase academic achievement (Taylor et al., 2017). Taking into account these findings, there have been many Quebec government initiatives over the years (e.g., Fluppy , http://www.centrepsed.gc,.ca; EKIP , https://www.msss.gouv.qc.ca › professionnels › jeunesse › ekip). These initiatives concern thepromotion of  a positive school climate, development of  emotional skills training, as well as measures aimed at improving mental health and countering violence in the school environment. Moreover, a collaborative agreement has been reached between the Ministries of  Education and Health in order to reinforce and generalize these initiatives to a wider community than the school environment. After all these years, however, it has become apparent that these approaches remain poorly understood, overly compartmentalized and therefore insufficiently implemented in the field (Durlak and DuPre, 2008). 
In light of  these observations, the Quebec 
Higher Council of  Education has issued a number of  recommendations that need to be addressed in the near future: 1) Consider the student as a wholeperson, not only as a learning individualbut as a flourishing human being; 2)Propose a systemic approach to SEL(Oberle et al., 2016) involving trainingof  students, school staff, parents andmembers of  the community; 3) Reviewthe initial and continuing training of  theentire school staff in order to take intoaccount the management of  students’emotions and well-being; 4) Developmore effective collaboration with socialservices and community organizationsin order to achieve a more coherent andcomplementary action plan.
Future Developments
Currently , most of  the Quebec programs aimed at improving SEL have used individual or group interventions. Considering, on the one hand, that the Ministry of  Education is phasing in a Digital Action Plan in education and, on the other, that the Quebec Higher Council of  Education is currently studying the education system’s role in preparing children and youths for living and working in a deeply transformed digital world, it seems appropriate to consider the use of  information and communication technologies (ICT) in fostering SEL learning.According to a meta-analysis (Gretemeyer and Mugge, 2014), prosocial video game use has been shown to increase empathy and therefore prosocial behaviour.  In the same context, recent studies have shown that video games may offer learning benefits, especially in the SEL field (Granic et al., 2014).  The implementation of  such programmes may improve emotional intelligence and psychosocial adjustment in adolescents (Cejudo et al., 2019) and may also produce functional neural changes after a few hours of  gameplay (Kral et al., 2017). 
Nevertheless, the integration of  ICT 
programs within the context of  whole school systems constitutes a challenge in itself.  One must also consider that ICT used for prosocial and educational purposes may be misused or abused and that, in adolescents, high social and emotional competency levels have been related to a lesser use of  technology (Nasaescu et al., 2018).  The digital divide is another important issue, as equality in access to digital tools and high-speed Internet between schools, regions, and families remains to be achieved; technology can reduce inequality in education but can also replicate and amplify existing social and economic inequalities.
In conclusion, although a systemic 
approach to social and emotional learning has produced compelling evidence of  its efficacy , the introduction of  new practices is a complex and dynamic process rarely One must also consider 
that ICT used for prosocial and educational purposes may be misused or abused and that, in adolescents, high social and emotional competency levels have been related to a lesser use of technologyoccurring in the short term (Bélanger et al., 2012). Regardless 
of  the program involved, the conditions in which it operates in the field are as important as the program itself.  Caution should therefore be exercised regarding the implementation of  any new intervention programs deemed to be effective.About the Conseil supérieur de l’éducation du Québec (Quebec Higher Council of Education)
The Quebec Higher Council of  Education was created in 1964 at the same time as the Ministry of  Education. The Council is dedicated to the development of  a global vision of  education. Its role is to collaborate with the Minister of  Education and Higher Education and to advise the Minister on any matter relating to education. EXPERT PIECES
Arain, M. Haque, M. Johal, L., Mathur, P ., Nel, W ., Rais, a., Sharma, 
S. (2013) maturation of  the adolescent brain. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 9, 449-461.Bélanger, J., Bowen, F ., Cartier, S., Desbiens, N., Montesinos-Gelet, I., Turcotte, L. (2012) L’appropriation de nouvelles pratiques d’interventions pédagogiques et éducatives en milieu scolaire: Réflexions sur un cadre théorique intégrateur. Éducation et francophonie, 40: 56-75.Boyle, M., Georgiades, K. (2010) Perspectives on child psychiatric disorders. In: J. Cairney , D. streiner, (Eds.) Mental Disorders in Canada, an epidemiological perspective, pp. 2015-226, Toronto: Toronto University Press.Boncu, A., Costea, I., Minulescu, M. (2017) A meta-analytic study investigating the efficiency of  socio-emotional learning programs on the development of  children and adolescents. Romanian Journal ofApplied Psychology , 19: 35-41.Cejudo, J., Lopez-Delgado, M.L. Losada, L. (2019) Effectiveness of  the videogame “Spock” for the improvement of  the emotional intelligence n psychosocial adjustment in adolescents. Computers in human Behavior, 101: 380-386Commonwealth Department of  Health and Aged Care (2000) National action plan for promotion, prevention and early intervention for mental health. Canberra, Australia: Mental Health and Special Programs Branch, Commonwealth Department of  Health and Aged Care.Corcoran, R.P . Slavin, R.E. (2016) Effective programs for social and emotional learning (SEL): A systematic review, The Campbell Corporation, www.campbelcollaboration.orgDurlak, J.A., DuPre, E.P . (2008) Implementation matters: a review ofresearch on the influence of  implementation on program outcomes and the factors affecting implementation, American Journal ofCommunity Psychology , 41: 327-350.Durlak, J.A., Domitrovich, C.E., Weissberg , R.P ., Gullotta, T .P . (2015) Handbook of  Social and Emotional Learning: Research and Practice, Guilford Press, New York.EKIP , https://www.msss.gouv.qc.ca › professionnels › jeunesse › ekip Fluppy , http://www.centrepsed.gc,.caGendron. B. (2007) Des compétences émotionnelles au capital émotionnel: une approche théorique relative aux émotions. Cahiers du CERFEE, 23: 9-55.Granic, I., Lobel, A., Engels, R.C.M.E. (2014) The benefits of  playing video games. American Psychologist, 69: 66-78.Gretemeryer, T ., Mugge D.O. (2014) Video games do affect social outcomes: A meta-analytic review of  the effects of  violent and prosocial video game effects. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 40: 578-589.Institut de la statistique du Québec (2018) L’enquête Québécoise sur la santé des jeunes du secondaire 2016-2017, Québec, L’institut, http://www.stat.gouv.qc.ca/statistiques/sante/enfants-ados/
adaptation-sociale/sante-jeunes-secondaire-2016-2017-te.htmlKral, T .R.A., Solis, E., Mumford, J.A., Schuyler, B.S., flook, L. Rifken, K., Patsenko, e.g., Davidson, R.J. (2017) Neural correlates of  empathic accuracy in adolescence. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12: 1701-1710.Nasescu, E., Marin-Lopez, I., Llorent, V .J., Ortega-ruiz, R., Zych, I. (2018) Abuse of  technology in adolescence and its relation to social and emotional competencies, emotions in online communication, and bullying, Computers in Human Behavior, 88: 114-120.Oberle, E, Domitrovich, C.E., Meyers, D.c., Weissberg, R.P . (2016) Establishing systemic social and emotional learning approaches in schools; a framework for schoolwide implementation, Cambridge Journal of  Education, 46: 277-297.OECD (2015) Skills for social progress: the power of  social and emotional skills, OECD Skills Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris.Paquette, N., Gajawelli, N., Lepore, N. (in press). Assessment of  neurodevelopment: Structural Neuroimaging in A. Gallagher, C. Bulteau, D. Cohen, J. Michaud (Eds.), Handbook of  Clinical Neurology-Neurodevelomental and Cognitive Disabilities, Elsevier.Pfeifer, JH, Blakemore, SJ (2012) Adolescent social cognitive and affective neuroscience: past, present and future. Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 7: 1-10.Shaw, P ., Lalonde, F ., Lepage, C., Rabin, C., Eckstrand, K., Sharp, W ., Greenstein, D., Evans, A., Giedd, J.N., Rapoport, J. (2009) Development of  cortical asymmetry in typically developing children and its disruption in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, Arch. Gen. Psychiatry , 66: 888-896.Taylor, R.D., Oberle, E., Durlak, J.A., Weissberg, R.P . (2017)Promoting positive youth development through school-based social and emotional learning interventions: A meta-analysis Tremblay , R.E. (2010) Development origins of  disruptive behaviour problems: the ‘original sin’ hypothesis, epigenetics and their consequences for prevention, J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry , 51: 341-367.
REFERENCESEXPERT PIECES25Therapist, Writer, Story-Weaver, Co-Founder of 
Children First Institute of Child & Adolescent Mental HealthRestorative Justice and 
Honouring Personal Agency 
SHELJA SEN
EXPERT
PIECESEXPERT PIECES
The underlying belief  is that the problem lies in the child and 
hence, it is the child who must be fixed. There is a belief  that the only way to discipline a child is through stringent measures. Typically , a teacher spends a lot of  her time trying to manage the class through chastising, critiquing, complaining and punishing. There is a mistaken belief  that if  we criticize children, they will become disciplined. However, does it work?
‘Misbehaviour and punishment are not 
opposites that cancel each other – on the contrary, they breed and reinforce each other.’ 
HAIM G. GINOTT,  
TEACHER AND CHILD PSYCHOLOGIST  
Some schools which are a little more aware and progressive use 
behaviour charts, red-yellow-green cards and a complex system of  rewards. Let me make it very clear that I am not much in favour of  this Skinnerian – from B.F . Skinner, a mid-twentieth-century behavioural psychologist – approach where reward and punishment are used to ‘discipline children’. This approach again focuses on ‘fixing the child’ and somehow completely takes away the personal agency of  the individuals and sees them as mere objects. Children learn to do things only for the incentive. They give their project on Discipline and obedience are traditionally considered the two sides of  the same coin. 
I have had teachers getting upset in my workshops when I try to 
question the significance of  ‘teaching’ discipline. I remember a well-meaning teacher almost came to tears telling me, ‘My job is to teach discipline to children and if  I need to take harsh disciplinary measures, so be it.’ I could not get her point, but I understood her emotions. We have made some practices sacrosanct in education, and it is time we question them. Teaching discipline is one. When we talk about teaching discipline in schools, we are talking about children learning to respect the authority of  teachers without any questions, follow the rules, be good and behave themselves. 
Through this typical approach all ‘behavioural issues’ are addressed 
through anger and antagonism. ‘Strict disciplinary measures’ are taken, like a visit to the principal, punishment, detention, suspension and in some cases, even expulsion. 
     ‘R
aghav, you lack discipline.’
     ‘Y ou should be ashamed of yourself.’ ‘He does not listen. All that he needs to 
learn is discipline.’ 
‘He will not do as he is told. All his 
problems are due to lack of discipline.’ time as they have been promised that every child who does so will 
be given a special sticker or candy . There is hardly any learning. In her research spanning twenty years, Carol Dweck has clearly demonstrated that rewards and praise tend to erode children’s motivation and their intrinsic need for learning. 
Building respectful and ethical minds needs to be at the core of  
our learning game plan in schools. As teachers, we need to aim at helping children to understand their choices and their consequences of  their behaviour rather than controlling it ourselves. That is how we help them to build life skills of  self-regulation, motivation, autonomy , sense of  competence and social justice. 
We cannot teach discipline to children in the same way that we 
cannot teach character to them. We can facilitate building a culture where qualities like discipline, kindness, compassion, integrity are valued. Where they are not empty words thrown at the children to make them feel inadequate about themselves. 
Across the world, there is a growing awareness (backed by research), 
and schools are rejecting the model of  zero tolerance for ‘discipline issues’, punitive measures, shame and punishment. However, we have a long way to go. 
Discipline at times is nothing but educational violence in disguise. One model that is gaining a lot of  credibility as an effective, 
respectful, more humane way of  building discipline is Restorative Justice. The main philosophy behind Restorative Justice is building 
27a culture of  ethics, character and 
inclusiveness. It is a collaborative approach to raising responsibility levels in a safe space. The focus is on inviting personal agency through dialogue, accountability and building a stronger sense of  community . Let’s understand it through an example. 
Suppose the child is caught with alcohol or 
cigarettes in her bag. What do we do? 
SCENARIO 1 
We call a disciplinary committee meeting, and we take harsh measures against the young person. We call her parents and tell them in no uncertain words how their parenting has been inadequate, and we announce that we have decided to suspend her for two months. 
Now let’s see the learning in this situation 
(isn’t that what schools are about?). The young woman goes away with a huge sense of  shame, resentment and anger. The word has spread around the school and the wider community , and she feels she will never be able to return to school. Even if  she does, she plots ways of  smoking without getting caught. The parents are angry with the school for their own humiliation and for blaming without taking any responsibility . They are extremely disappointed in their daughter, and their sense of  rage is going to leave a huge dent in their relationship with her, which might never be repaired. The school authorities, despite what they show to the world, are left feeling inadequate and confused. Did they take the right step? After all, they had some responsibility too. Is this what teaching discipline is about? 
SCENARIO 2 
Now imagine another scenario but the same situation – a girl, found with cigarettes or alcohol. In this school, there is a strong culture of  community , cooperation and accountability . The focus on this school is on accountability and learning rather than blaming. A teacher or a counsellor sits with the girl and understands the situation. The focus here is on asking and not telling, and the You-Me-We approach. 
Let’s see how it might play out in a 
condensed version. 
[Young Person: Rhea, Class Teacher: CT]
Rhea (body tensed, angry voice): I don’t care what you say . CT (quiet power and soft, gentle voice): I can sense you are upset, Rhea. In your shoes, I might have felt the same. However, before we decide on anything, I would like to hear your side of  the story .Rhea (softening up a little): What do you want me to say?  
After some time, reassured that the teacher is genuinely interested, Rhea might give her version which may be true or untrue. Rather than sitting and arguing about it, she would be given a fair listening without any judgement. 
CT: Let’s work on this together as a team. 
I have heard you, and now I will share with you my perspective. 
She goes to share the school’s concerns 
and ask questions like: 
Do you know the reason we follow 
this procedure?What are your thoughts about this procedure?What do you think of  the choices you made and its impact? What can you do to show accountability?What would be the ethical thing to do?Would you like to talk to your parents or would you want us to do so? Then the teacher could summarize with: We need to find ways so that we are accountable for your choices and define how we can support you in it. Would be fine with you?Rhea (shrugs her shoulder): Sure. 
Whatever Rhea decides, the two areas that 
require work are personal and community . Finally , after some reflection, she might decide that to seek counselling, and she could also opt for some community work in an NGO for a month after school hours.
Then, another meeting with the parents, 
the principal, the class teacher and the counsellor could be called. The focus of  the meeting would not be on shaming or humiliating anybody but highlighting that a boundary had been crossed and now the young woman had to choose a suitable way to seek accountability . The emphasis would be on how the action caused harm to her and the community , and some restorative steps would need to be taken to address it. 
Restorative justice has been 
widely researched and found to be extremely effective in cutting down challenging behaviours. The 
crucial aspect of  this approach is that the focus is on separating the person from the problem. The team, comprising all the adults, comes together as caring and concerned members who do not challenge the dignity or the honour of  the young person. On the one hand, there is respect, but on the other, there is clear understanding that there has been harm to the person and the community and definite steps would need to be taken to restore that. She is given choices in the way she would like to address the issue. She is being invited to exercise her agency and be in touch with her ethical compass. EXPERT PIECES
In the end, the parents walk away assured that their daughter, despite her earlier incorrect choices, is now working towards more responsible behaviour, the school will feel assured that they have done all they could to support their own student and the young woman would walk with her dignity intact and possibly a huge learning about healthy and unhealthy choices. 
This approach is about collaborating with the child, 
respectfully , to make them think for herself, build skills of  responsibility , autonomy and accountability . 
The focus needs to be on staying respectful, defining how the action 
had harmed individuals or the self-worth of  the person rather than shredding it, are always positive. Depending on the damage, the restorative practices could include measures like community work in class/school (when damage has been caused to the community), apology letter (when a person has been hurt), arriving half  hour earlier to school to arrange the supplies needed that day (when punctuality boundary has been crossed) and many other such practices which balance accountability and raise responsibility levels. 
It is heartening to see how contemporary research in education 
backs this approach. Many schools have seen a major shift in the so-called ‘disciplinary issues’ since this model has been adopted. Of  course, it goes without saying that teachers are included in these open, transparent, collaborative restitution practices. If  I as a teacher have crossed certain boundaries, it stands to reason that I show accountability too. Children have sensitive radars for hypocrisy , so do watch out! 
Dweck, Carol. Mindset: The New Psychology of  Success. Ballantine 
Books. 2007. Greene, Ross. Lost at School: Why Our Kids with Behavioral Challenges are Falling Through the Cracks and How We Can Help Them. Scribner. 2014.Excerpt from: Sen, Shelja. Imagine: No Child Left Invisible, Building emotionally safe spaces for inclusive &creative learning. Harper Collins. 2017REFERENCESEXPERT PIECES
Restorative justice has 
been widely researched and found to be extremely effective in cutting down challenging behaviours. 29Reframing Educational 
Success from the
Mind to the Heart: 
an Introduction to
SEE Learning
TYRALYNN FRAZIEREXPERT
PIECESEXPERT PIECES
training provided by an education enable 
people opportunities that increase their 
life choices, potentially . This increase in 
life choices means increased access to 
resources that could improve the per capita 
standard of  living. At the individual level 
of  experience, this translates to children 
growing up healthier and to women, 
men, and families having more robust 
economic security . These observations 
drive the current global pressure to further 
invest in educational systems to continue 
to increase the skills that prepare young 
students to compete in a global economy . 
This drive accelerates competition for 
employment and reinforces even further 
needs for improvements in educational 
systems through economic investment. 
This preparation arms race3 positions 
educational success based on lifetime 
productivity4 that, like a corporation, must 
continue to accelerate productivity to 
continue to succeed.  
It is clear that education can catalyze 
increases in measures of  productivity 
that are good for a nation. But what is 
missing in this framing of  success? This 
framing does not capture a nation’s 
social production of  or alleviation 
from suffering. Nor does it capture 
the happiness of  its citizens. 
While educational attainment, 
globally , is on the rise, when we 
look at success through the lens of  
happiness, global trends are not as 
positive5. The Easterlin Paradox, first 
put forth in 1974 by economist Richard It is universally accepted that the education of  a nation’s 
citizens is one of  the pillars of  a nation’s success. Indeed, 
per capita, educational expenditures are associated with increased 
employment and decreased levels of  poverty . Additionally , the 
successful education of  a nation’s people has been associated with 
improvements in social conditions. Globally , there is evidence that 
successfully educating a population when they are young increases 
future overall economic attainment and confers positive social 
benefits such as improved socioeconomic status, reductions in 
crime, and improved public health1,2, all of  which are signs of  a 
nation’s successful social and economic development. Accordingly , 
what is it that education is doing within a nation that makes it so 
influential to a nation’s success? 
Education changes what a person can do in society , 
thus changing the quality of  human capital available 
to that society . Nations allocate large portions of  spending 
towards education because increases in literacy and the direct skills Education needs not only to develop our 
intelligence but also to support the basic 
human values of warm-heartedness and 
compassion.
DALAI LAMAEasterlin, states that a nation’s happiness 
tends to increase with growing economic 
development, to a point. Easterlin suggests 
that there is a threshold beyond which 
happiness and economic development, 
at the national level, either no longer 
correlate or have a negative association6. 
This paradox has been contested since 
it was first proposed, but this reframing 
of  “success” has set off a global 
discussion about the nature of  economic 
development, and the responsibility of  
a nation to support the development of  
happiness in their citizens7. For example, 
The United Nations began tracking 
national measures of  happiness 
through the World Happiness 
Report and has included measures 
of  well-being in their Sustainable 
Development Goals8. Measures of  
social conditions that impact happiness 
have also become more prevalent within 
the social discourse. For example, measures 
of  inequity , not just absolute wealth, 
have emerged as essential indicators 
of  national well-being9. Inequity is a 
robust indicator of  social discomfort, low 
cohesion, disparities in health, and other 
factors associated with well-being10. More 
nuanced understandings of  education11, 
equitable access to education, and the 
purpose of  education are evolving too. 
Literacy and employment remain key 
indicators of  the success of  a nation’s 
education system, but the conversation 
is now expanding to include indicators 
of  success that more closely resemble 
the notion that nations need to consider how students are actually feeling. This 
reframing has become most prevalent in 
discourses on the social and emotional 
development of  a nation’s young students. 
This is more commonly referred to as 
social and emotional learning (SEL). 
The term SEL gained prominence in the 
US educational vocabulary around the 
mid-90s. This is when the Collaborative 
for Academic, Social and Emotional 
Learning (CASEL) was established12. The 
skills or capacities that were emerging as 
important during this time included social 
awareness, self-management, relationship 
skills, and other capacities that are often 
referred to as “soft skills.” Globally , other 
terms that encompassed this idea of  
cultivating soft skills were becoming more 
prominent as well in education. Phrases 
such as 21st century skills and transversal 
competencies represent the global 
recognition that attaining student success 
in this age of  ever-evolving technological 
advancement means supporting student 
capacities that go beyond traditional 
academic achievement goals. Transversal 
skills and 21st century skills are similar 
but have some differences. UNESCO has 
identified domains of  transversal skills that 
students will need to cultivate to succeed 
in this new age of  technology . These 
include critical and innovative thinking, 
interpersonal skills, intrapersonal skills, 
global citizenship, media and Information 
literacy13. Twenty-first century skills more 
broadly refer to learning, literacy , and 
life skills such as flexibility , leadership, 
initiative, productivity , and social ability . This framing does not 
capture a nation’ s social 
production of or alleviation 
from suffering. Nor does it 
capture the happiness of its 
citizens. While educational 
attainment, globally , is on 
the rise, when we look at 
success through the lens of 
happiness, global trends 
are not as positive.
Ph.D., Research Scientist, Center for Contemplative 
Science and Compassion- Based Ethics, 
Emory University31Support for the cultivation of  such “life” capacities has been 
expressed by the National Research Council, The World Health Organization, The World Bank, and many other global non-profit and for-profit institutions
14. 
While there is a lot of  global activity around this focus on the cultivation of  “soft skills” in education, there is little consensus on which of  these capacities are most important, nor is there a consensus on how to measure them. This confusion is driven by the number of  varying 
educational frameworks that may capture some capacities but not others or define these capacities differently , even when they have the same name. The Harvard Taxonomy project was created to wade through this confusion. This was designed to create a coherent taxonomy of  non-cognitive skills that are often categorized as “soft skills” across disciplines and educational frameworks
15. 
This initiative to organize these ideas acknowledges the need to support students beyond literacy and traditional learning but also highlights the fundamental problems around trying to measure this development. What should be measured? How should it be measured? At what point in development should it be measured, and how do we approach measurement without becoming reductivists in how we approach the cultivation of  these life skills in our students. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is working to address some of  these issues through the development of  their international survey to assess social and emotional skills in 10- and 15-year-old students in countries around the world
16. While there is no consensus on which 
of  these capacities or competencies are most important, CASEL has been a leading voice in framing and communicating the evidence-base supporting the cultivation of  social and emotional development in schools in a way that is most useful for schools and educators
17. But much more work is needed to create consensus 
around the aspects of  social and emotional development that support students both academically and in life. 
In all of  this confusion, what this activity demonstrates is that there 
is a new framing of  success that is emerging. The globe might be ready for a more dynamic movement to push the needle on this shift. But, to do this, we need more powerful tools. We need these tools to address measurement. We also need these tools to address equitable access to educational programs that target the cultivation of  these life skills associated with improved well-being, beyond just productivity . Embedded in this call for access is the issue of  equitable global access to educator training that supports educators in facilitating their students in cultivating social and emotional skills. Another implicit idea within this discussion goes back to the notion that the role of  a nation might be, at least in part, to support the cultivation of  happiness in its citizens. The Dalai Lama has called for a new way of  thinking about education. He calls for educational systems that “support the basic human values of  warm-heartedness and compassion.” While the discourse on social and emotional development is very important, it does not go so far as to say that we should be educating the hearts of  our children not just their minds. At Emory University , we take this stand. We have developed a program that aims to do just this. 
Through a supportive partnership between the Dalai Lama and 
Emory University , the SEE Learning program was developed. This program was a response to the call from the Dalai Lama to create a non-secular curriculum that supports children in their ethical development. He said that we need to educate the heart. This program aims to do this at a fundamental level by providing students with a curriculum that was developed through a framework (Figure 1a) that supports the cultivation of  compassion for self, others, and humanity at large. This framework consists of  nine components. Within each component are enduring capabilities that we have identified as essential to developing that component. For example, appreciating interdependence can be cultivated by creating learning experiences that develop a child’s understanding of  the interdependence of  systems, as well as, their understanding that individuals exist within contexts that they are both effected by and can influence (Figure 1b). By assisting children in cultivating the awareness of  and compassion for this understanding, we are supporting children in finding ways of  engaging compassionately with the world they inhabit. 
The SEE Learning curriculum consists of  learning 
experiences that target the development of  these enduring capabilities in elementary , middle, and high school students. This curriculum is available online, and it is free and open to anyone interested in obtaining it. The SEE Learning program also provides an online educator orientation program where any educator around the world is welcome to gain initial orientation towards the SEE Learning program. This technological tool has been incredibly powerful in expanding the reach of  our program. Currently , over 4,000 educators from around the globe have used this online platform. We are also developing an online facilitator training program to train expert facilitators in conducting in-person training workshops to support educators who would like to bring SEE Learning to their communities. His Holiness says that this program must reach every child on the globe. The vision of  the SEE Learning program at Emory University is to serve students and educators from the moment they start their education through their developmental years, worldwide, in response to this call. 
This program has been developed in collaboration with experts 
in education, child development, neuroscience, systems thinking, and resilience cultivation. This is a highly evidence-informed program, and we are working with our team of  experts to develop a robust evidence-base. We are also working to develop our research program in compassion science that aims to understand the cultivation of  compassion throughout child development. While education is the pillar of  a nation, cultivating reading, writing, and arithmetic are not enough. There is a growing agreement on this. Now we need to harness this collective understanding and utilize the powerful advances in technology to further amplify this movement. As with any inspired idea, there is the potential of  the EXPERT PIECES
idea, and then there is the actualization of  that potential. This is where the real work begins. The cultivation of  happiness, joy , and well-being matter so much. No longer can success be defined of  old, as a measure of  individual productivity . We need a new definition that is inspired, compassionate, equitable in access, and fills the heart with joy . This is a vision for global education that could change not simply a nation, but the world. 
Figure 1. The SEE Learning Theoretical Framework. Social, Emotional, and Ethical 
(SEE) Learning program is based on a three by three theoretical framework. This framework forms the basis for the curricula, the educator trainings, and the SEE Learning program as a whole. For more information about SEE Learning, please go to https://seelearning.emory.edu/ 
1. American Psychological Association. (2019, November 15). Retrieved from Education and Socioeconomic Status: https://www.apa.org/pi/ses/resources/publications/education2. Hahn, R. A., & Truman, B. I. (2015). Education improves public health and promotes health equity . International journal of  health services, 45(4), 657-678.3. Worthman, C. M. (2011). Inside-out or outside-in? Global development theory , policy , and youth. Ethos, 39, 432-451.4. Worthman, C. M., & Trang, K. (2018). Dynamics of  body time, social time and life history at adolescence. Nature, 554(7693), 451-457.5. Kesebir, S. (2018). When Economic Growth Doesn't Make Countries Happier. Retrieved 2019, from https://hbr.org/2016/04/when-economic-growth-doesnt-make-countries-happier6. Easterlin, R. A. (1974). Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence. Nations and households in economic growth, 89-125.7. Sacks, D. W ., Stevenson, B., & Wolfers, J. (2012). Subjective well-being, economic development, and growth. In P . Booth, The pursuit of  happiness: well-being and the role of  government (pp. 59-97). London: Institute of  Economic Affairs.8. Helliwell, J., Layard, R., & Sachs, J. (2012). The world happiness report. 9. Allen, J. B. (2017). The psychology of  happiness in the modern world: A social psychological approach. New York: Springer Publishing Company .10. Graafland, J., & Lous, B. (2019). Income inequality , life satisfaction inequality and trust: a cross country panel analysis. Journal ofHappiness Studies, 20(6), 1717-1737.11. Teulings, C., & Van Rens, T . (2008). Education, growth, and income inequality . The review of  economics and statistics, 1(90), 89-104.12. Edutopia. (2011). Retrieved 2019, from Social and emotional: a short history: https://www.edutopia.org/social-emotional-learning-history.13. Care, E., Vista, A., & Kim, H. (2019). Assessment of  transversal competencies: current tools in the asian region. UNESCO Bangkok.14. Chalkiadaki, A. (2018). A systematic literature review of  21st century skills and competencies in primary education. International Journal of  Instruction, 11(3), 1-16.15. EASEL. (2019). Harvard University . Retrieved from Taxonomy Project: https://easel.gse.harvard.edu/taxonomy-project
16. OECD. (2019). Retrieved from The Study on Social and Emotional Skills - About the Study: http://www.oecd.org/education/ceri/study-on-social-and-emotional-skills-the-study.htm17. CASEL. (2019). Retrieved from The Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning: https://casel.org/
REFERENCESSelf-Regulation Self-CompassionAttention &
Self-AwarenessENGAGEMENT COMPASSIONDIMENSIONSDOMAINSAWARENESS
Relationship
 SkillsCompassion
for OthersInterpersonal
Awareness
Community &
Global EngagementRecognizing
Common HumanityAppreciating
InterdependenceENGAGEMENT COMPASSION AWARENESSEXPERT PIECES
Component: Appreciating Interdependence
Component: Recognizing Common Humanity
Component: Community and Global Engagement1   Understanding Interdependent Systems
     Comprehend the interrelated nature of our world and the methods of systems     
     thinking.
2  Individuals within a Systems Context
     Recognize  how all individuals exist within a systems context, and how they  
      affect and are affected by that context.
1  Appreciating the Fundamental Equality of All
    Extend the realization of fundamental equality and common humanity to those    
    outside one's immediate community and ultimately to the world.
  2  Appreciating How Systems Affect Well-Being
     Recognize  how systems can promote or compromise well-being on cultural   
     and structural levels, such as by promoting positive values or perpetuating        problematic beliefs and inequities.
1  Exploring One's Potential for Effecting Positive Change in Community 
    and World
    Recognize one's  own capacity to individually or collaboratively effect positive   
    change based on one's abilities and opportunities.
2  Engaging in Communal and Global Solutions
     Explore and reflect on creative and collaborative solutions to issues affecting   
     one's community or the world.33ELLIOT SOLOWAY CATHIE NORRIS
SHELJA SEN TYRALYNN FRAZIERTECH
Extended Conversations on SELEXPERT
PIECES
THE FOLLOWING PIECE IS AN EXTENDED CONVERSATION FROM TECH  
2019’S CATALYTIC SESSION ON SEL FOR TEACHERS — EMPOWERING  TEACHERS WITH SEL FOR SELF AND THE CLASSROOM, BETWEEN FOUR  EXPERTS.EXPERT PIECES
Stressed children  can’t learn
• "Our findings indica
te 
that stress in the
classroom environment affects children’s
likelihood of  exhibiting learning problems(difficulties with attentiveness, taskpersistence, and flexibility), externalizingproblems (frequency with which the childargues, fights, disturbs ongoing activities,and acts impulsively), problems interactingwith peers (difficulties in formingfriendships, dealing with other children,expressing feelings, and showing sensitivity ,or internalizing problems (presence ofanxiety , loneliness, low self-esteem, andsadness in the child)."
And there are many sources 
of
 
stress
 
outside  
the classroom that the 
children then bring into their classrooms:• "Stressed
 
out, overscheduled, hurried:
These words are often used to describechildren these days."
Based on the pioneering work of  the 
Collaborative for Academic, Social, Social-Emotional Learning (SEL): How are we going to address our children’ s emotional needs?
Our children are hungry — food-wise and emotion-wise. Schools have addressed the former and they are starting to address the latter . We begin by defining social and emotional learning, then we raise a few provocative questions, and then we hear from Dr . Tyralynn Frazier, an SEL expert, who explores “SEL and Equity .”
• "Hungry
 
Children Can't Learn Properly!"
• "School lunch
 
is critical to student health and well-being,
especially for low-income students
 
—
 
and ensures that students
have nutrition they need throughout the day to learn."
• "…
 
food
 
[is] a basic school supply , akin to textbooks and pencils."
Recognizing
 
the need to provide America’s children with food 
– lunch and now breakfast – the U.S. Congress has passed anumber of  bills (the
 
National School Lunch Act  
of  1946, the  
Child
Nutrition Act of  1966
 
and the  
Healthy , Hunger-Free Kids Act of
2010)
 
to address this issue. Sadly , though, hunger is still an issue in
America’s schools.• "More than
 
13 million kids in this country go to school hungry…
Currently , 22 million students across the country rely on reduced-price or free school lunches through the National School LunchProgram (funded by the USDA)."and Emotional Learning (CASEL), an organization started in 1994 to spread the word about social and emotional learning (SEL)
 
—
 
and on the work of  
other organizations (e.g., the UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi Institute of  Education for Peace and Sustainable Development –
MGIEP , the  
Committee for Children)
who are now lending their voices to thechoir, there is recognition that:• "…
 
in order
 
for kids to be successful
academically , their other needs must bemet, too. That includes their social andemotional needs."• "…
 
students need to be socially aware
and emotionally engaged to learn effectively ."
The U.S. Congress has even begun 
to participate. There are some funds provided in the 2015
 
"Every Student 
Succeeds Act (ESSA)
 
"
 
for schools 
to implement  
"evidence-based 
SEL"
 
programs.So, what is SEL
 
—
 
social and emotional 
learning?• "Social and emotional learning (SEL) isthe process through which children andadults understand and manage emotions,set and achieve positive goals, feel andshow empathy for others, establish andmaintain positive relationships, and makeresponsible decisions."
In contrast to cognitive skills, which 
have traditionally received the lion’s share of  attention in schools, SEL are the
 
"soft,"
 
non-cognitive skills. CASEL 
identifies
 
five core  
SEL competencies: 
self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationships skills, and responsible decision-making• "These
 
competencies
 
enhance students’
understanding of  themselves and othersaround them."
While  
CASEL
 
has been around 
since  
1994, it is only relatively recently that 
SEL has received serious attention. Indeed:
35• "Social-emotional learning (SEL) has
be
come arguably one of  the hottest topics
in education in the last couple of  years."• "The
 
Future
 
of  Education Depends on
Social Emotional Learning: Here’s Why"• "I believe [SEL} is the start of  a neweducation for the future."
Why SEL
 
now?
 
Good question.
Can
 
SEL be  
taught?
 
Good question, too.
Does SEL have positive impacts on 
students
 
—
 
their learning, their behavior, 
etc.?
 
Yes. (Oh, and another good question!)  
SEL and Equity: Both Need to be Addressed
Prepared by: Dr . Tyralynn Frazier  
During a t
raining that I was taking on 
equity in education, I was talking with an expert and respected colleague about the work that I do on social, emotional, and ethical (SEE) learning. With respect and warmth, she turned to me and made this comment:• "Mindfulness-based social and emotionallearning programs feel like the warm hugof  white supremacy ."
The purpose for my 
presence in the training was to learn how to bring genuine and overt equity skills into our program. I was among a group of educators in the South Eastern United States, an area living with legacies of racial inequity . As someone who was raised in the south, I knew this struggle well, but her comment confused me. How could she say this? This talented, dedicated teacher working passionately for her students, all of them, seemed to fundamentally misunderstand what social and emotional learning (SEL) programs are about.The purpose for my presence in the 
training was to learn how to bring genuine and overt equity skills into our program. I was among a group of  educators in the South Eastern United States, an area living with legacies of  racial inequity . As someone who was raised in the south, I knew this struggle well, but her comment confused me. How could she say this? This talented, dedicated teacher working passionately for her students, all of  them, seemed to fundamentally misunderstand what social and emotional learning (SEL) programs are about.
After the training, I brought my confusion 
and frustration to an educator and team member working with me on the
 
SEE 
Learning
 
program, and she said
• "I get it."
This response transformed my perspective 
on what SEL needs to be to support all of  our students, not simply the most privileged. My team member said,• "We are like fish, swimming around insystems of  inequity that depend on the maintenance of  these unseen structures of  supremacy to remaining unseen. We are fish who refuse to acknowledge the existence of  the inequitable waters because the privileged in these inequitable waters get the most oxygen and thrive, while the most disadvantaged are suffocating."
My friend and team member said that I 
was coming to the educators I work with to bring SEE Learning into their classrooms giving children tools for individual capacities such as self-regulation without creating spaces that acknowledge the inequity . A person cannot change a system simply by trying to "fix" an individual. This is a piece of  the puzzle but not the whole picture because it is the disparity and inequity that has created the stress and adversity many of  the most disadvantaged kids carry . When some SEL programs that do not address equity explicitly are introduced into schools it can feel to the educators and students of  those schools that these tools are to navigate the inequity thus passively allowing the supremacy structures to remain in effect. This is the "warm hug" that educator was talking to me about in that equity training.
 
W
ow! By not thinking about the systems in 
which the students were embedded, I was inadvertently and ignorantly , ignoring a fundamental need.
After this experience
, my colleagues 
and I, in the SEE Learning program, continued the conversation about equity and what it means in the context of  SEL skills. Equity is hard when we talk about SEL because SEL programs tend to target individual capacities, while equity challenges tend to be entrenched in systemic patterns. The solution that I put forth is to think about where change happens in a system. It happens at a policy level, which is not the domain of  SEL programs.
Change
 also happens at the level of  the 
relationships. How do I see you and how am I seen by you? We live in entrenched systems of  dominance and oppression, but can I both see this and have compassion for you and myself ? If  SEL programs ignore this need to sit comfortably with discomfort, and to compassionately see one’s own place in inequitable systems with humility , then the programs are potentially enabling systems of  white supremacy to remain unaffected.
T
here is
 
overwhelming evidence  
that SEL 
in schools improves social, academic and health outcomes. The social and emotional development of  our children, globally , is a powerful tool for global change. But there are additional responsibilities that must accompany social and emotional development programs as they come into the classroom and schools we support. This is a long conversation that must begin with students and educators being provided the skills to hold space for compassionate discomfort and disagreement, without getting dysregulated. And schools, globally , need greater support in implementing EXPERT PIECES
social and emotional development programs at the level of  the whole school.
Social-Emotional Learning (SEL): Helping teachers to address their 
children’s emotional needs
K-12 education has spent the lion’s share of  its energies on
developing the cognitive side of  our children. And, that’s not abad thing, don’t get us wrong! But,
 
"we"
 
—
 
educators, parents,
researchers, and students
 
—
 
are now seeing that  
"we"
 
need to deal
with the emotional, non-cognitive side of  our children too. A childwho is hungry for food, is not prepared to learn, and a child hungryfor emotional stability is also not prepared to learn.
Let’s go ahead and explore the role that the classroom teacher can 
play in helping our children develop just such emotional stability . 
The blogpost is written by a noted expert on children, teachers, 
and education, Dr. Shelja Sen.  Based in Delhi, India, Shelja is a co-founder of Children First:
It T akes Courage to Be a T eacher
Prepared by: Dr . Shelja Sen
As a mother and a therapist, I have seen children go through an 
almost magical transformation every time they have an exceptional teacher. I remember working with a child who was struggling with depression and recurrent self-harm. We had tried all kinds of  interventions for months, but the darkness was not budging. Then the school decided to change his section and put him with a teacher whose skills were known far and wide. And what she did was amazing.
 
 In a couple of  months’ time this child had not only 
pushed depression out of  his life but was actively involved in the class play , being a buddy for another child with a learning disability and making new friends. When I asked the boy what had changed, he
 
replied with a shrug and,
 
"Dunno!"
Not satisfied with this answer and thoroughly intrigued, I contacted the boy’s teacher and asked her what
 
"strategies"
 
she had used. Her answer was very 
simple,  
"I just make sure the child knows that he is 
loved, he belongs and that the whole class is with him. He is not alone."
 
I remember just sitting still for a long 
time after talking to her as the power of  her words struck me.
 
 All that talk and the buzz we hear about classroom 
management, teaching strategies, and inclusion all amount to nothing if  the teacher is not able to love each and every child in the class and make sure they know it.
It is my deep faith that the magical relationship that a teacher builds 
with each child is the heart, the lifeblood and the bare-bones of  learning. I use a simple mantra that I call the message of  WOW:• W: You are Worthy as you are now! I will not define your worthby your marks, abilities or background.• O: You are Original! I will value your uniqueness, what makesyou
 
— "you"
 
and not compare you to others.
• W: You are Welcome! I will accept you as you are, I will notshame you and will make sure I give you an emotionally safe spaceto grow.
The core thing in WOW is
 
"no matter what"
 
—
 
you are worthy , 
you are original and you are welcome – no matter what your 
gender, ability , marks, sexuality , looks or background.
 
 WOW is at 
the core of  Socio-emotional learning (SEL).
In order to help teachers better understand WOW , I have an 
exercise for them:• To start with, think of  one or two children in your class withwhom you might be struggling. Now take a paper and pencil or pen, and answer some of  these questions.• WorthinessWhen I look at/think of  this child, do I feel he is worthy of  my attention, my recognition, my respect, my trust, my optimism?Do I see him as worthy as any other child in the class?Do I make this sense of  worthiness unconditional• OriginalWhen I look at/think of  this child, do I see the uniqueness of  herbeing?Do I see her struggles, her difficulties but also her strengths, herassets and her affinities?Do I connect to what makes this child tick? Do I know her dreams,her passions, what makes her buzz?• WelcomeDo I enjoy the presence of  this child in my class?Do I communicate it through eye contact, calling out his name,greeting him, recognizing him at various levels?Do I make sure that he understands that he has a unique place inthe school community?
As teachers and adults, it is critical that we constantly 
keep reflecting and asking ourselves these questions. If  you felt uncomfortable while doing this reflection, you are on the right track. These are tough and painful questions for us to face. It’s not about being a perfect teacher but a more mindful and compassionate one.
 
 As a 
teacher, I have to be aware of  children I connect to easily and where the WOW flows spontaneously .
However, more importantly I have to be mindful when I struggle to 
give WOW to a child.
 
Again, here I would like to reiterate my deep 
belief  that teaching is not about them but about us. It is a daily practice for us to connect to our children and create the wonder of  learning. If  I am not able to make the connection and see the WOW , I need to dig deep and reflect on what is stopping me from doing that. There is no greater learning than that. No workshop, seminar, training can help me become a better teacher until I look within and face the gremlins that stop me from connecting to the EXPERT PIECES37Game-Based Courses – 
Exploring New Paradigms 
in Game-Based LearningEXPERT
PIECES
GAMES FOR LEARNING TEAM, UNESCO MGIEP
Dr. Nandini Chatterjee Singh | PROGRAMME  SPECIALIST , SCIENCE OF LEARNING, UNESCO MGIEP
Ms. Aditi Pathak  | NATIONAL PROGRAMME OFFICER, UNESCO MGIEP 
Mr. Akash Kumar Saini | DIGITAL PEDAGOGY DEVELOPER, UNESCO MGIEP 
Ms. Anurati Srivastva | ILLUSTRATOR, UNESCO MGIEP 
Mr. Devesh Kumar | CONSULTANT , UNESCO MGIEP 
Mr. Robin Sharma | GAMING CURRICULUM DEVELOPER, UNESCO MGIEP 
and Mr. Vignesh Mukund | INDIVIDUAL SPECIALIST , UNESCO MGIEPEXPERT PIECES
skills (Gee, 2014). This makes it imperative for both teachers and 
students to be aware of  the advantages and potential of  games for 
learning (Kirriemuir & McFarlane, 2004). 
Games for Learning: UNESCO MGIEP’ s 
Approach
At UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi Institute of  Education for Peace 
and Sustainable Development (MGIEP), we seek to explore the 
potential of  video games by taking learning a step further and have 
initiated the process of  developing game-based courses. While these 
game-based courses may be created across schools and universities, 
MGIEP focuses on developing courses for adolescents in the age 
group of  13-18 years. 
MGIEP’s mandate is to work towards achieving peaceful and 
sustainable societies through education – with a focus on social and 
emotional learning (SEL). Social and emotional learning (SEL) 
can be described as learning that allows all learners to identify 
and navigate emotions, practice mindful engagement and exhibit 
prosocial behaviour for human flourishing towards a peaceful and 
sustainable planet. Consequently , all game-based courses designed 
at MGIEP focus on building knowledge about the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), while also explicitly cultivating SEL 
competencies.
MGIEP’s game-based courses are designed to leverage the narrative 
of  video games. The game forms the ‘central text’ around which a Recent research from the cognitive sciences shows that 
to achieve learning that is deep, adaptive and lifelong, 
pedagogies need to include - storytelling; reward; 
play; curious; reflective; multisensory; interactive and 
experiential  (Rautela & Singh, 2019). Game-based learning 
is an emerging pedagogical approach that ticks many of  these 
boxes and provides access to content using real-world situations. 
Emerging research shows that such game-based approaches not 
only facilitate learning but also enable rapid assessment and real-
world skill development (Squire; Shute, Ventura, Kim & Wong, 
2012).  Since games are designed using principles of  play 
and motivation, they also allow learners to proceed at 
their own pace and permit the tracking of  incremental 
progress (Bavelier, Green, Pouget & Schrater, 2012). In recent 
years, digital games have emerged as effective tools to teach 
mathematics, science, humanities and even social-emotional curriculum is designed, such that the user acquires new knowledge 
and cultivates SEL competencies.  Game-based courses 
provide an opportunity for learners to experience 
different social reactions and to solve situational 
problems as well as social dilemma thereby enabling 
an assessment of  the user’s actions, motivations, and 
biases. This also helps the learner in translating knowledge and 
skills gained within the game to real-life.
MGIEP conducted a catalytic session entitled ‘Gamestorming 
Curricula’ at its annual flagship conference, ‘Transforming 
Education Conference for Humanity (TECH) 2019, during which 
the Games for Learning team shared the process around which 
the game-based courses are developed, and how they may be 
used in classrooms. The objective of  the session was to engage in 
conversations about the process and philosophy of  creating game-
based curricula and how they might facilitate the cultivation of  SEL 
skills.With the advent of digital technology entering education 
systems, the potential of digital games based learning 
is enormous. This article discusses UNESCO MGIEP’s 
approach of harnessing the ability of digital games for 
building social-emotional skills and the process of designing 
learning experiences around existing games.Abstract
Process of Designing Games Based Courses
The process of  designing game-based courses at MGIEP 
is rooted in best practices in both instructional design 
and game mechanics. The various processes involved in 
designing a game-based course are described below.
The first and most important step in designing a game-based course 
involves the selection of  the game. The course creator must:T o ensure the efficacy of the course, the 
creation of the game-based course should 
be followed by a research study with pre 
and post-assessments to ensure that the 
identified competencies are cultivated in 
students in the classroom.SELDigita l
Games
Classr oom
Curriculu mGame-based
Course s39Selection of 
the Game
Identiﬁcation of 
Learning Outcomes
Identiﬁcation of 
Pause Points
Integration of 
Instructional 
Activities
Integrating 
Assessments
EXPERT PIECES
• Identify the specific Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
ar
ound which the course is focused and the Social and Emotional
(SE) competencies it seeks to cultivate in the learner. SEcompetencies are specifically centred around MGIEP’s framework,entitled EMC
2, which stands for Empathy(E), Mindfulness(M),
Compassion(C), Critical Inquiry(C) (Singh & Duraiappah, 2019).
• Games that meet the above requirements may then be explored
in greater detail to design the course and curriculum. This requiresthe games to be played by multiple players (at least 5) followedby objective analysis of  its abilities to provide information aboutknowledge and achievement of  the specific SDG and EMC
2 SEL
skills.
• T
his is followed by the creation of  course design such that users
build explicit knowledge of  the focused SDG and SEL skills.
• T
he last and final step involves identifying specific pause points
in the game, during which the user switches from the game to theonline course. The pause points are breakaway points from thegameplay and present a crucial turning point within the narrativeof  a game, allowing users time to reflect, engage in dialoguesand discussions, and take perspectives of  different users within the game. This is done to indulge the user in explicit learning experiences outside of  the game. While designing this process, it is important to keep in mind the pace at which the game should be played in the classroom.
T o ensure the efficacy of  the course, the creation of  the 
game-based course should be followed by a research study with pre and post-assessments to ensure that the identified competencies are cultivated in students in the classroom.
A few game-based courses that have been created by MGIEP 
are listed on the page to the left. In case you are interested in participating in any of  our research studies around these game-based courses, please contact gamesforlearning@unesco.org
The Catalytic Session was moderated by Mr. Devesh Kumar 
and the panel speakers included members from the ‘Rethinking Learning’ team at MGIEP - Ms. Aditi Pathak, Mr. Robin Sharma, Mr. Akash Kumar Saini, Ms. Anurati Srivastva and Mr. Vignesh Mukund.
Bavelier, D., Green, C. S., Pouget, A., Schrater, P . (2012). Brain 
Plasticity Through the Life Span: Learning to Learn and Action Video Games. Annual Review of  Neuroscience 35:1, 391-416 https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-152832Gee, J. P ., (2014) Blogazine. Partnership for 21st Century Skills Volume 1, Issue 8, No. 13 Kirriemuir, J., & McFarlane, A. (2004). Literature Review in Games and Learning. A NESTA Futurelab Research Report - Report 8, July 2004, 1–40. https://telearn.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00190453/file/kirriemuir-j-2004-r8.pdfRenuka Rautela & Nandini Chatterjee Singh (2019) Libre—Nourish the Brain So the Future Can Flourish, Childhood Education, 95:5, 34-43, DOI: 10.1080/00094056.2019.1663094Shute, V ., Venture, M., Kim, Y . J., & Wang, L. (2012). Video Games as Learning. Postsecondary Play: The Role of  Games and SocialMedia in Higher Education, 10-1-10–30. http://www.colorado.edu/journals/cye/19_1/19_1_14_LearningDisabilities.pdfSingh, N., C., & Duraiappah, A.K., (2019) EMC2 – a whole brain framework for social and emotional learning. Position Paper UNESCO MGIEPSquire, K. D. (n.d.). Running head: VIDEO GAMES IN EDUCATION. Europe, 1–27.
REFERENCESPROCESS OF 
CREATING A
GAME-BASED 
COURSE AT MGEIP
Bury Me, My Love:
Identity in Crisis
Refugee Crisis & Identity: This course revolves around the life of  refugees, their altered sense of  home, belonging, identity and aspirations.
Take the courses by logging onto: 
https://framerspace.com/
For further information, visit the Institute's website: 
https://mgiep.unesco.org/games-for-learningGAME-BASED COURSES BY UNESCO MGIEPEXPERT PIECES
Florence:
Perspective and Patterns
Gender Identity: This course explores the concepts of  Identity and Gender through the journey of  Florence, a 25-year-old girl.
World Rescue:Decision Making towards Sustainability
Sustainability & Decision-Making: This course explains the overall concept of  ‘sustainability’ while the learners play as different characters from around the world.This War of Mind:T o be, or not to be
Prevention of  Violent Extremism & Resource Management: This course takes the learner through a set of  stories of  people trying to survive in war-affected regions.Gris:Perception & Interpretation
Art Appreciation & Critical Inquiry: This course integrates the concept of  grief  and loss and builds critical inquiry and empathy with the tool of  art appreciation.41
THEME II :
Reimagining Reimagining 
Learning SpacesLearning Spaces 
for Planetary for Planetary 
Citizenship Citizenship 
TO ACHIEVE A MORE PEACEFUL AND 
SUSTAINABLE SOCIETY , WE NEED TO MOVE A W AY FROM A CULTURE OF COMPETITION TOW ARDS A CULTURE OF PEACE AND COLLABORATION, recognizing spatial and temporal interdependence amongst us, and our embeddedness and dependence on the ecosystems.  For education to be transformative, it must explore notions of intersectionality and create learning spaces conducive for people to take multiple perspectives, engage in dialogue and critical reflection, and transform society through self-transformation.  
Anantha Duraiappah, 
Director, UNESCO MGIEP
Elisa Navarro Chincilla
Educational Video Games Developer
Joanna Skorupska, 
Founder and Sustainable Future Strategist, Radicalzz Studio
Jon Ramer, 
Founder, Compassion Games International
Kavita Rao, 
Professor of Special Education at the University of Hawai‘i, Mānoa
Matthew Farber, 
Assistant Professor, T echnology , Innovation, and Pedagogy , University of Northern Colorado
Monisha Bajaj, 
Professor, International & Multicultural Education, University of San Francisco
Narendra Mehrotra, 
Senior Consultant, UNESCO MGIEP
Nirmal Govindaraju, 
Research Assistant Professor, Oklahoma State University , Tulsa, Oklahoma
Olivier Crouzet, 
Head of Pedagogy at "42", a disruptive educational model and coding school
Paul Darvasi, 
Educator, Writer, Game Designer
Santhya Vikram, 
Y ellow Train School
T obias Krantz, 
Head of Education, Research and Innovation Confederation of Swedish Enterprise
Vipul Reddy , 
Head of School Enablement, Khan Academy
CATALYTIC SPEAKERS:
CATALYTIC SESSIONS:
Rethinking Assessment of Learning for 
Human Flourishing
Redesigning Learning Spaces for nurturing 
Global Citizens
Fostering Learner AgencyInnovative pedagogies for SDGs43
CATALYTIC SESSION
Learning Spaces
The Catalytic Session on Learning Spaces explored ways in 
which the structures and design of  learning space influenc-
es the quality of  the relationships and interactions in the 
classroom both amongst peer learners and between student 
and teacher, as well as its influence on quality of  participa-
tion. Speakers representing traditional, experimental, and 
digital learning settings shared their experience of  creating 
learner-centric learning spaces, elaborating how learning 
space can inspire an open and inclusive classroom culture or 
instigate a regimented one and how it can shape the power 
dynamics and learner engagement. CATALYTIC SESSION 
Fostering Learner
Agency  
The Catalytic Session on Fostering Learner Agency was 
opened by the moderator Prof. Monisha Bajaj, who shared 
a powerful story of  students from a remote school in south 
India, who used their training in human rights education to 
demand better quality mid-day meals at school as opposed 
to the food mixed with dead insects and stones that they 
were used to being served. During the course of  the session 
speakers went on to unpack the concept of  agency in the 
classroom; its place in the ‘Social, Emotional and Ethical 
(SEE) learning’ framework; and the practical things that can 
be easily done in regular classrooms to promote agency . CATALYTIC SESSION
Rethinking 
Assessment 
for Human 
Flourish ing
The Catalytic Session on Rethinking Assessment for Human 
Flourishing invited speakers to share their experience of  
devising meaningful, learner-centric assessment. Assess-
ment is an important determinant to the overall learning 
experience for both learners and teachers. However, the 
indicators of  educational quality , especially in developing 
countries, continue to be driven by a utilitarian human capi-
tal ideology . The session began with an overview of  the skills 
gap that exists today , and dove into games-based assessment 
and games that are specifically designed for assessing certain 
learned skills and knowledge could become effective means 
for assessment.CATALYTIC SESSION NO. 11
Innovative 
Pedagogies for 
SDGs  
The Catalytic Session 11 on Innovative pedagogies for 
SDGs explored a number of  teaching and learning ap-
proaches, both digital and non-digital, that hold promise as 
effective tools for transformative learning. Ms. Elisa Chin-
chilla, a game-based learning expert from Mexico, shared 
how a video game on gender-based violence (GBV) is being 
used to build awareness on gender violence and discrimina-
tion amongst adolescents in Mexico; Mr. Nirmal Govin-
draju shared his experience of  using project-based learning 
(PBL) for STEM learning to cultivate critical thinking and 
problem solving skills in students from low-resource schools 
in India. Finally , Prof  Bajaj spoke about the role of  human 
rights education in building the learner’s knowledge as well 
as their agency to ‘talk back’ to hegemonic discourses and 
effect positive social change.SESSION DESCRIPTOS
SESSION
DESCRIPTORS45Professor, College of Education
University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa
Honolulu, HI, United States
kavitar@hawaii.eduBeyond Access: Universal 
Design for Learning (UDL) 
and Digital T ools for 
Meaningful Inclusion
KAVITA R A O 
EXPERT
PIECESEXPERT PIECES
Inclusion and equity are overreaching priorities of  education 
in the 21st Century as noted in United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals 4 (SDG 4). These goals uphold the 
importance of  access to education for all individuals, regardless 
of  ability , background, and socio-economic status. Access is 
an essential aspect of inclusion, ensuring that all learners 
are able to attend school, participate with their peers, and 
avail of educational resources. However, access alone does not 
automatically ensure that students are meaningfully included 
in the educational experience. To ensure meaningful inclusion, 
it is necessary to design learning environments to recognize the 
variability of  learners and to support diverse needs, abilities, 
preferences, and strengths of  all individuals. In an ideal inclusive 
environment, every student will be supported and engaged in the 
learning process.
Digital tools, integrated purposefully into learning 
activities, are a powerful way to support inclusion. Simply 
having access to digital tools, however, does not ensure that students 
use the tool to meet learning goals. To maximize the potential of  
digital tools as a resource for learning, it is important to consider 
environmental, pedagogical, and student-level factors. This paper 
describes how the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) guidelines 
provide a framework for taking these factors into consideration 
and thereby making purposeful decisions about how we support 
students with technology .
Universal Design for Learning (UDL)
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is a framework for 
designing inclusive educational environments. Developed 
by the Center for Special Education Technology (CAST), UDL is based on the premise that when we design to include those at 
the margins, all learners will benefit. The developers of  the UDL 
framework noted that it is the curriculum, not the child, who 
needs to be changed (Meyer & Rose, 2005). As a result, the UDL 
framework focuses on the reduction of  barriers and takes a learner-
centered approach to design in order to increase access to learning 
for all. 
The concept of learner variability is at the heart of UDL. Learner 
variability is the recognition that every individual has varied 
abilities, needs, strengths, and preferences. In addition, learner 
characteristics are not fixed and immutable; an individual’s needs 
and preferences can vary and change depending on the situation 
and environment. By designing with learner variability in mind, 
teachers can offer flexibility and choice and integrate instructional 
scaffolds that can be useful for many . Based on the premise that 
learner variability is the norm, UDL is about proactive design of  
learning environments, with supports built in and accessible to all 
students (Meyer, Rose, & Gordon, 2014).
These three principles are further defined by nine guidelines and 31 
checkpoints. The UDL guidelines can be downloaded from http://
udlguidelines.cast.org/. Using the UDL guidelines, we can build 
in supports and scaffolds that address learner variability and make 
learning environments more inclusive of  all students, including 
those with varied experiences, backgrounds, and ability levels. The concept of learner variability is at the 
heart of UDL. Learner variability is the 
recognition that every individual has varied 
abilities, needs, strengths, and preferences. Universal Design for 
Learning
Digital ToolsInstructional and 
Assistive TechnologyKeywords
In the past decade, emerging digital tools have changed 
the educational landscape, by expanding the possibilities of 
how we teach and learn. With access to computers, digital 
devices, and the internet, students have various options 
to learn, communicate, and create. Technology gives 
students flexibility and the ability to connect to authentic 
experiences beyond school walls, providing an engaging 
and motivating environment for learning. However, used 
without intentionality and purpose, technology can hinder 
learning and widen the digital divide in the classroom, 
disadvantaging some students. To ensure that technology 
is used to support the learning of all rather than contributing 
to marginalization of some, it is essential to consider 
educational technology adoption in the context of inclusion 
and equity. This paper describes how digital tools can be 
integrated with instruction in alignment with Universal 
Design for Learning (UDL) guidelines that promote inclusion.Abstract
47UDL Principle III: Provide Multiple Means of Engagement• Built in features to modify display of information (contrast, font size, spacing) can provide options for 
perception. These options can be essential for learners with sensory disabilities and learning disabilities (Dawson, Antonenko, Lane, & Zhu, 2019).• Multimodal aspects of technology affords varied formats for accessing information (e.g., using photos and/or audio) instead of just text (Bryant, Ok, & Rao, 2014; Rao, 2015)
• Built in assistive technologies provide varied means of action and expression. It is important to ensure that students know how to and when to uses these features in the context of instructional activities (Ok & Rao, 2019).
• Online resources provide a source of authentic and engaging information and materials to use in classroom activities. Using internet-based tools and social media, teachers can go beyond textbook learning to increase relevance and help students make connections.
• Video self-modeling (VSM) is a technology-based strategy that can be used to support self-regulation of students. VSM can be used to foster self-efficacy around academic, behavioral and social objectives. (Hitchcock, Dowrick, & Prater, 2003)• Digital text is inherently flexible, allowing users to engage with information in varied ways. Assistive features such as text-to-speech and other literacy support tools (e.g., hyperlinks to definitions, annotating) can support decoding, vocabulary, reading fluency and comprehension.
• Multimodal environments can be used for creating and demonstrating knowledge, giving students means of expression that go beyond traditional written products and assessments. These tools can be integrated purposefully to give students scaffolds for expression, e.g., using photos, audio, and video instead of or along with text to articulate information. (Hitchcock, Rao, Chang, & Yuen, 2016; Skouge, Rao, & Boisvert, 2007)
• Collaborative documents allow students to create and develop information collectively. For example, using Google Docs or Google Slides, students can build a classroom book with each student taking ownership of one page/slide.• Online sources provide information in varied and multimodal formats; this can be used to build background knowledge and support comprehension.
• Several features of technology can support executive functions that are essential for learning (processing information, memory, organization, goal-setting).  These include software/apps for calendars, reminders, note-taking, and audio recording. (Ok & Rao, 2019)1. Perception
2. Language, mathematical expressions and symbols
3. Comprehension
4. Physical Action
5. Expression and Communication
6. Executive Functions
7 . Recruiting interest
9. Self-regulation8. Sustaining effort and persistenceEducational and Assistive 
T echnologies
Emerging digital tools have the potential to transform education. These tools can help teachers create engaging and relevant learning experiences for students. Technology allows us to consume, create, and share information in ways unprecedented in the past. Today’s digital tools can play a powerful part in learning, allowing students to (a) search for and find information on any topic, (b) access information in a variety of  formats, (c) create information and (d) easily share information andinteract with others locally and globally . 
In addition to the ways in which 
technology allows us to access and share information, digital tools have brought assistive technology features to our fingertips. Assistive technologies that were once specialized are now available for free or at low cost, easily accessed on commonplace devices, such as our laptops and mobile phones. For example, speech to text software (e.g., Siri) is commonly used to convert what we say aloud into a text message. We can also easily convert text to audio, watch video clips to learn a variety of  skills, and invoke translators, grammar checkers, and online dictionaries with ease. These assistive features, which were once the realm of  specialized assistive technologies, are now available within our everyday tools. In addition to assistive supports, digital tools include various multimodal options that can support diverse learning needs. Multimodal features of  technology allow us to integrate visuals, audio, video and text and give students various ways to consume and comprehend information and demonstrate what they know. 
Simply having access to digital 
tools, however, does not ensure that students use the various features and supports that make them powerful tools for learning. For technology to support meaningful inclusion and equity in the classroom, it is necessary to consider the features of  digital tools in the context of  the learning experience (Nelson, Fien, Doabler, & Clarke, 2016). It is imperative to evaluate how technology supports the purpose of  lessons and learning objectives for the students. Digital tools can then be integrated into the learning environment to support individual students as well as to facilitate learning for all.
Emerging digital tools have 
the potential to transform education. These tools can help teachers create engaging and relevant learning experiences for students. Considerations for 
Fostering Inclusion and Equity with T echnology
Technology integration into education begins first with basic access to the tools. Before we can decide whether and how to use digital tools for instructional purposes, it is important to consider who has access to the tools and what additional supports they need to have sustained access. Taking learner variability into consideration, there are several pre-requisite questions in relation to these issues of  basic access:
1. For the student, what barriers exist in
relation to technology access?
2. For the student, what aspects of  the
technology are cost-restrictive?
3. Are there learners who do not have
prior experiences with technology and whowill need additional support to effectivelyuse the tool?
4. If  technology is used for educational
purposes, do students have access to thetechnology at home?
5. For students who can benefit from
specialized tools and assistive technologies,is there support to learn and use these toolsand features?
6. Ho
w can all learners be given access to
the assistive features of  technology that arebuilt into digital devices?
After considering issues of  basic access 
to the tools, we can examine digital tools from the lens of  meaningful inclusion and equity . The UDL guidelines can be used to ensure that digital tools can facilitate learning for all. The table below presents examples of  ways in which digital tools can be integrated in alignment with UDL guidelines.EXPERT PIECES
Based on research on 
cognition and learning, the principles of UDL address how, what, and why we learn. The three principles of UDL are: 
 
PRINCIPLE 1
PROVIDE MULTIPLE MEANS OF 
REPRESENTATION (WHAT WE LEARN)
PRINCIPLE 2
PROVIDE MULTIPLE MEANS OF 
ACTION AND EXPRESSION (HOW WE LEARN)
PRINCIPLE 3
PROVIDE MULTIPLE MEANS OF 
ENGAGEMENT (WHY WE LEARN)EXAMPLES OF USING DIGITAL TOOLS FOR INCLUSION/EQUITY
Digital tools provide several features and affordances that inherently provide multiple means of representation. The 
multimodal nature of digital information and the flexibility of digital text are two powerful ways to address learner 
variability . The three UDL guidelines under Representation focus on providing options for:
UDL Principle II: Provide Multiple Means of Action and Expression
Digital environments provide a canvas for demonstrating skills and knowledge in varied formats. Integrated into 
instruction, technology gives students alternatives for demonstrating their understanding and articulating their 
knowledge. The three UDL guidelines under Action and Expression focus on providing options for:
Digital tools are inherently engaging for students, and teachers leverage on this for instructional purposes by 
considering when and how these tools can connect students to others and to authentic, engaging, and relevant 
purposes. The three UDL guidelines under Engagement focus on providing options for:EXPERT PIECES
UDL Principle I: Provide Multiple Means of Representation49Although digital tools continually evolve and change, the core 
features that make them assistive learning tools will remain. By 
considering the features of  the tool in the context of  UDL, teachers can integrate technology with the lens of  good design, focused on 
creating learner-centered and inclusive learning environments. 
MATTHEW FARBER
Ed.D.
University of Nothern ColoradoVideo Games Are 
Not  Educational 
T echnology
MATTHEW FARBER
EXPERT
PIECESEXPERT PIECES
Video Games
Educational TechnologyConstructionism
Game-Based LearningKeywords
Well-designed video games create meaningful experiences 
for players (Culyba, 2018; Fullerton, 2018; Isbister, 2016); 
good educational video games balance player actions with 
learning outcomes (Groff, Clarke-Midura, Owen, Rosenheck, 
& Beall, 2015). Balanced design video games engage by 
increasing in task complexity, but may not emotionally 
resonate with players. This paper argues that focusing 
on designing balanced design may have had unintended 
consequences, such as the reinforcement of notions that 
video games can also be used as transactional teaching 
machines. Several frameworks are shared that can marry 
the design goals of teaching and games that seek to create 
meaningful player experiences. Ideas about extending 
learning to other contexts are also shared.Abstract
Bryant, B. R., Rao, K., & Ok, M.W . (2014). Universal design for 
learning and assistive technology: Promising developments. In B. 
DaCosta & S. Seok (Eds.), Assistive technology research, practice, and 
theory (pp. 11-20). Hershey , PA: IGI Global. doi: 10.4018/978-1-
4666-5015-2
Dawson, K., Antonenko, P ., Lane, H., & Zhu, J. (2019). 
Assistive technologies to support Students with dyslexia. 
TEACHING Exceptional Children, 51(3), 226–239. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0040059918794027
Hitchcock, C. H., Dowrick, P . W ., & Prater, M. A. (2003). Video 
self-modeling intervention in school-based settings: A review. 
Remedial and Special Education, 24(1), 36–45. https://doi.
org/10.1177/074193250302400104 
Hitchcock C., Rao, K., Chang, C., & Yuen, J. (2016). TeenACE 
for Science: Using multimedia tools and scaffolds to support 
writing. Rural Special Education Quarterly , 35(2), 10-23. 
doi:10.1177/875687051603500203
Meyer, A., & Rose, D. H. (2005). The future is in the margins: The 
role of  technology and disability in educational reform. In D. H. 
Rose, A. Meyer & C. Hitchcock (Eds.), The universally designed classroom: Accessible curriculum and digital technologies (pp. 13-35). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press 
Meyer, A., Rose, D. H., & Gordon, D. T . (2014). Universal design for 
learning: Theory and practice. Wakefield, MA: CAST Professional 
Publishing. 
Ok, M. W ., & Rao, K. (2019). Technology tools for the 
inclusive classroom: Using Google Chrome to support all 
learners. Journal of  Special Education Technology . Online first. 
doi:10.1177/0162643419841546
Nelson, N. J., Fien, H., Doabler, C. T ., & Clarke, B. (2016). 
Considerations for realizing the promise of  educational gaming 
technology . TEACHING Exceptional Children, 48(6), 293–300. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0040059916650639
Rao, K. (2015). Universal design for learning and multimedia 
technology: Supporting culturally and linguistically diverse students. 
Journal of  Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 24(2), 121-137. 
Skouge, J., Rao, K., & Boisvert, P .  (2007). Promoting early literacy for 
diverse learners using audio and video technology . Early Childhood 
Education Journal, 35(1), 5-11.REFERENCESEXPERT PIECES
51
Introduction
In 2017, the United States Department of  Education’s Office 
of  Educational Technology added video games to its National Education Technology Plan (NETP). The NETP presented video games as all-in-one teaching machines that could instruct, engage, and assess learners. It concluded by recommending further research into “how embedded assessment technologies such as simulations, collaboration environments, virtual worlds, games, and cognitive tutors can be used to engage and motivate learners while assessing complex skills” (National Education Technology Plan, 2017, p. 90).
As it happens, recent research about educational gaming 
has suggested efficacy in the alignment of  core mechanics (repeated actions players take) with learning outcomes  
(e.g., Groff,
 
Clarke-Midura, Owen, Rosenheck, &
 
Beall, 2015; 
Klopfer, Osterweil, & Salen, 2009; Hapgood & Ainsworth, 2011). Instead of  using playful interactions as reward, balanced design video games embed learning into the tasks of  gameplay . For instance, in the tablet game DragonBox Algebra (We Want to Know, 2012), players learn algebraic thinking through core mechanics of  cancelling and balancing playing cards that appear on two sides of  a digital box. In other words, players learn algebra by doing algebra.
While engagement, motivation, and learning outcomes from 
playing games like DragonBox Algebra have been observed, transfer of  knowledge from the game to other contexts (e.g., solving actual algebra problems from a textbook) has been less evident (e.g., Students can also analyze and design 
games for learning which can boost social emotional learning competencies such as social awareness and self-awareness 
Long & Aleven, 2017). Further, reports like NETP , which focus on 
psychometrics, reinforce notions that video games are educational technology tools that can be harnessed as transactional teaching machines, used to augment, or replace, textbooks—not experiences that can transform learning. Of  course, we want increased learning outcomes, and not glorified digital worksheets. However, video games can be used for more than transmitting knowledge. 
This paper argues that video games can support transformational 
learning. For instance, project-based learning can be married to game-based learning, thus deepening student understandings of  abstract concepts. Students can also analyze and design games for learning which can boost social emotional learning competencies such as social awareness and self-awareness (CASEL, 2019).  
Transforming Students
Educational games—including those that are balanced in design—tend to be teaching machines because they focus on explicit purposes of  teaching content or skills to students. Commercial games, however, are designed differently: Player mastery of  tasks is part of  an overall experience. For instance, when playing Assassin’s Creed: Odyssey (Ubisoft, 2018), players become immersed in ancient Greek philosophy , geography , and history; but, learning about classicism is secondary to the players’ experience in that world. 
Herein is the difference between 
educational games and commercial games: good learning games that are balanced show efficacy in teaching can become quickly boring or rote, as they do not consider player experience as primary . In commercial games—games created for entertainment purposes—the player’s experience is often the focal design goal (Culyba, 2018; Hunicke, LeBlanc, & Zubek, 2004; Schell, 2008); all of  the core mechanics, rulesets, and goals exist to create an emotional experience (Fullerton, 2018; Isbister, 2016). 
The Mechanics Dynamics Aesthetics 
(MDA) Framework (Hunicke et al., 2004) is a widely adopted model for designing and analyzing games (e.g., Ralph & Monu, 2014; Schrier, 2019; Walk, Görlich, & Barrett, 2017). This framework is systems-based, recognizing that games are not transmissive forms of  media; rather, games are artifacts, as their underlying systems alter based on player decisions (Hunicke et al., 2004). 
Using the MDA Framework enables game 
designers to select mechanics that create a dynamic system which evokes aesthetics, or emotional responses from players. Playing games can be fun and/or competitive, but also can evoke nuanced emotions such as feelings of  fellowship, discovery , complicity , guilt, shame, or pride (Hunicke et al., 2004; Isbister, 2016).
When analyzing games, Hunicke et al. 
(2004) suggest starting with mechanics, then dynamics and aesthetics. Using the analog (non-digital) party game Happy Salmon (North Star Games, 2016) as an example, the game is played as players stand in a circle and draw cards with physical actions (i.e., “fist-bump,” “high-five”). The goal of  the game is to discard all cards in a player’s hand, which can only be accomplished by calling out the action and then performing that action with another player who has that same card (call out fist-bump, then fist-bump another player). Through MDA, Happy Salmon’s mechanics are all of  its components, which are the decks of  cards, and its rules. These mechanics are static until gameplay begins, which then creates a dynamic system. The result of  that system are player emotions such as frivolity , and happiness. 
Happy Salmon teaches matching concepts 
through a balanced design framework (Groff et al., 2015). However, this game was not designed to be a transactional teaching tool: it is a party game. While matching cards is how players win, it is also the action that creates the dynamic system that evokes the aesthetic goal of  happiness. 
When designing games, Hunicke et 
al. (2004) suggest using the framework backwards: Consider desired aesthetics, or player emotions, as the design goal. Building on this notion, the Transformational Framework (Culyba, 2018) similarly can be used to design games. Transformational here refers to games designed with the intention to change players in some way” (Culyba, 2018, p. 7). 
When designing transformational games, 
Culyba (2018) recommends centering on the player, making the goal of  the game both assessable and achievable so that any transformation can be compared to the player’s initial state. In other words, when making a game that teaches reading, player emotions around feeling positive about reading should be the desired goal; fluency and literacy then follow.
Games + Constructionism
While
 playing video games can be seen 
as constructivist, or learning by doing (e.g.; Gee, 2007), some games present learning as constructionist (Kafai & Burke, 2015; 2016). Constructionist gaming blurs playing games with the design and prototyping games that often is followed by sharing within communities of  practice (Kafai & Burke, 2015; 2016; Papert, 1980). Kafai and Burke (2015; 2016) observed that beyond learning from playing games, making games can be part of  larger ecosystems where players become designers. 
Constructionist gaming platforms include 
Minecraft, a sandbox of  exploration and construction that can be transformational to learning (Karsenti, Bugmann, & Gros, 2017). Playing Minecraft can boost a child’s creativity , innovative thinking, and problem-solving abilities, while at the same time teaching necessary content and skill knowledge (Butler, Brown, & Críosta, 2016; Karsenti, Bugmann, & Gros, 2017). Microsoft purchased Minecraft in 2014, and then published an educational modification, Minecraft: Education Edition in 2016. In this version, students record and document their own learning using blocks unique to the Education Edition such as camera blocks and digital chalk boards.
Sandbox games like Minecraft use digital 
objects (i.e., blocks and resources in the player’s inventory) as “objects-to-think-with” (OTTW; Papert, 1980; Brady , Holbert, Soylu, Novak, & Wilensky , 2014; Holbert & Wilensky , 2019). Holbert and Wilensky (2019) suggest that in addition to balancing game mechanics with learning outcomes, embedding OTTW in the player experience can be transformative to how children learn in educational games.   
Not all sandboxes are 
transformational to learning, as teachers may encourage students to follow specific recipes to create to their desired outcomes, rather than promote playful experimentation EXPERT PIECESEXPERT PIECES53
As the field of game-
based learning evolves and matures, it should focus not just on balanced design and embedded assessments. Balanced design educational games align learning outcomes with core mechanics, while commercial games are often designed with player emotion as its desired outcome. and tinkering (Resnick, 2017). 
Restricting play with OTTW can restrict learning, as it can turn open-ended play into digital equivalents of  fill-in-the-blank worksheets. (This may be evident in some science, technology , engineering, and math (STEM) kits, which can be assembled in only one “correct” way .) 
Conversely , just as some teachers adapt 
textbook materials to drive constructionist learning, some transactional learning games may be used by teachers in transformative ways. In schools, games can be used intentionally , embedded within a larger set of  curricular goals and learning objectives, as well as surrounded by a variety of  activities to foster deeper learning. For example, after an extensive literature review of  existing frameworks and digital games about ethics, Schrier (2015) proposed the Ethics, Practice, and Implementation Categorization (EPIC) Framework, which included educational goals and strategies. Ethics in games can help players cultivate social and emotional skills such as responsible decision making. Schrier (2015) recommended open-ended activities and student reflections that can help promote transfer of  learning from the game to real-world contexts. Further, constructionist tenets that undergird project-based learning, such as student voice and choice, authenticity , public product, and reflection (Gold Standard PBL, 2019), can follow playing educational, as well as commercial, games. This builds on Kafai and Burke’s (2015) notions around constructionist gaming to broaden to “games + constructionism.” Here, students design and share personally meaningful external artifacts, which may not necessarily be games at all. After experiencing a game, students can then write reflections, as well as create projects that extend learning from games to the real-world. EXPERT PIECES
Butler, D., Brown, M., & Críosta, G.M. (2016). Telling the story 
of  MindRising: Minecraft, mindfulness and meaningful learning. ICEdTech16 Proceedings. Melbourne, Australia: International Conference on Educational Technologies.Brady , C., Holbert, N., Soylu, F ., Novak, M., & Wilensky , U. (2015). Sandboxes for model-based inquiry . Journal of  Science Education and Technology , 24(2/3), 265-286. Culyba, S. (2018). The transformational framework. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon ETC Press.Core SEL Competencies. (2019). https://casel.org/core-competencies/  
Fullerton, T . (2018). Game design workshop: A playcentric approach to creating innovative games (4th ed.). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Morgan Kaufmann.Gee, J. P . (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy (rev. ed.). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.Gold Standard PBL. (2019). https://www.pblworks.org/what-is-pbl/gold-
standard-project-designGroff, J., Clarke-Midura, J., Owen, V . E., Rosenheck, L., & Beall, M. (2015). Better learning in games: A balanced design lens for a new generation of  learning games. https://education.mit.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/BalancedDesignGuide2015.pdfHabgood, M. P . J., & Ainsworth S. E.
 
(2011). Motivating children 
to learn effectively: exploring the value of  intrinsic integration in educational games.
 
Journal of  the Learning Sciences,
 
20
 
(2), 169-206.
Holbert, N. R., & Wilensky , U. (2014). Constructible authentic representations: Designing video games that enable players to utilize knowledge developed in-game to reason about science.
 
Technology , 
Knowledge and Learning,
 
19(1), 53-79. 
Hunicke, R., LeBlanc, M., & Zubek, R. (2004). MDA: A formal approach to game design and game research. https://users.cs.northwestern.edu/~hunicke/MDA.pdfIsbister, K. (2016). How games move us: Emotion by design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Kafai, Y . B., & Burke, Q. (2015). Constructionist gaming: Understanding the benefits of  makinggames for learning. Educational Psychologist, 50(4), 313-334. Kafai, Y . B., & Burke, Q. (2016). Connected gaming: What making video games can teach us about learning and literacy . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Karsenti, T ., Bugmann, J, and Gros, P . P . (2017). Transforming Education with Minecraft? Results of  an exploratory study conducted with 118 elementary-school students. Montréal: CRIFPE. Klopfer, E., Osterweil, S., & Salen, K. (2009). Moving learning games forward. Retrieved from MIT Education Arcade website: http://education.mit.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/
MovingLearningGamesForward_EdArcade.pdf  Long, Y ., & Aleven, V . (2017). Educational game and intelligent tutoring system: A classroom study and comparative design analysis.
 
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 
(TOCHI),
 
24(3), 1-27.  
National Education Technology Plan. (2017). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of  Education, Office of  Educational Technology . https://tech.ed.gov/netp/North Star Games. (2016). Happy Salmon. [Tabletop game].Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books. Ralph, P ., & Monu, K. (2014). A working theory of  game design: Mechanics, technology , dynamics, aesthetics, & narratives. Retrieved from: www.firstper sonscholar.com/a-working-theory-of-game-design/             Resnick, M. (2017). Lifelong kindergarten: Cultivating creativity through projects, passion, peers, and play . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Schell, J. (2008). The art of  game design. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann.              
Sc
hrier, K. (2019). Designing games for moral learning and knowledge 
building. Games and Culture, 14(4), 306-343.  Ubisoft. (2018). Assassin’s Creed: Odyssey . [Computer game].Walk, W ., Görlich, D., & Barrett, M. (2017). Design, Dynamics, Experience (DDE): An advancement of  the MDA Framework for game design. Game Dynamics. Springer International Publishing.  We Want to Know. (2012). DragonBox Algebra. [Computer game].REFERENCESConclusion
As the field of  game-based learning evolves and 
matures, it should focus not just on balanced design and embedded assessments. Balanced design educational games align learning outcomes with core mechanics, while commercial games are often designed with player emotion as its desired outcome.  
Transformational game-based learning means that the student-as-player’s experience is primary . To be transformational, all games—including balanced design educational games—must start by considering the player experience as paramount. 55Professor, International & Multicultural Education
University of San Francisco Schools Must 
Prioritize Fostering 
Learner Agency
MONISHA BAJAJ  
EXPERT
PIECES
The concept of  “agency” lies at the core of  many liberatory forms 
of  education that draw from Brazilian philosopher Paulo Freire’s 
theories of  education raising learners’ critical consciousness and 
equipping them with the knowledge, skills, and networks to act for 
positive social change (Freire, 1970). The term agency is utilized 
widely across disciplines to refer to a variety of  behaviors and 
actions. This essay explores the concept of  transformative agency 
(Bajaj 2009, 2018; Hays, 1994), which lies at the center of  justice-
oriented educational projects, such as education for peace and 
human rights. In the opening example from Tamil Nadu, India, 
learning about human rights led to students collectively organizing 
for change through a catalyzing of  their transformative agency . To 
meet the challenges of  the 21st century , educators must foster the transformative agency of  students as a core civic function along 
with conventional objectives of  education, such as literacy and 
numeracy .
Agency in Educational Research 
In educational research, two groupings of  agency/resistance 
emerge through ethnographies of  schooling and examinations of  
social inequalities in education: (1) oppositional resistance, and (2) 
transformative/strategic resistance (Aronowitz & Giroux, 1993; 
Giroux, 1996 & 1997; Solorzano & Delgado Bernal, 2001; Willis, 
1977). Scholars have asserted that individual consciousness and 
community resistance through collective action have some role 
to play in transforming schools from serving only the dominant 
class to serving the interests of  other sectors in society as well 
(Apple, 1982; Foley , 1991; Freire, 1970; Aronowitz & Giroux, 
1993; Noguera & Cannella, 2006). Through the cultivation of  
an individual and collective consciousness based on a critique of  
social inequalities, belief  in one’s present or future agency may 
ensue.  Departing from traditional resistance theorists who see 
agency primarily as opposition (Willis, 1977; MacLeod, 1995), 
critical theorists Aronowitz and Giroux assert that “the concept of  resistance must have a revealing function that contains a critique of  
domination and provides theoretical opportunities for self-reflection 
and struggle in the interest of  social and self-emancipation” 
(1993, p. 105). Freire (1970) argued that education must heighten 
students’ critical consciousness as they come to analyze their place 
in an unequal world, and that resultant from this elevated critical 
consciousness is a transformative sense of  agency that can lead to 
individual and social change (Bajaj, 2009; Noguera, Cammarota & 
Ginwright, 2006; Giroux, 1997; Noguera, 2003). 
Transformative agency can be fostered among students 
in various settings and more recent empirical research in 
the United States and globally has identified such agency-Transformative agency can be fostered 
among students in various settings and 
more recent empirical research in the United 
States and globally has identified such 
agency-enabling factors as participation in 
activist-oriented afterschool programsEXPERT PIECES
In this essay, an argument is made for the importance of 
transformative agency as a core competency for students. 
Transformative agency emerges from educational research 
on agency and resistance as a form of action and orientation 
rooted in Freirean notions of critical consciousness and 
praxis. Transformative agency lies at the center of justice-
oriented educational projects, such as education for peace 
and human rights. To meet the challenges of the 21st century, 
educators must foster the transformative agency students 
as a core civic function along with conventional objectives 
of education, such as literacy and numeracy. A holistic 
framework for transformative agency is reviewed and 
examples are given about how educators can support the 
cultivation of student agency. Abstract
57enabling factors as participation in activist-oriented afterschool 
programs (Bajaj, 2009 & 2012; Kwon, 2006), knowledge of  
and personal contact with those engaged in collective struggle (O’Connor, 1997) and deliberate efforts to foster agency through school discourses and practices (Bajaj, 2009, 2012; Miron & Lauria, 1998; Shah, 2016). Transformative Agency
In conceptualizing transformative agency , I present four dimensions explored in scholarship from various fields to offer a framework that is elaborated more fully in Bajaj (2018). In this model, transformative agency is constituted by (1) Agency that is sustained across contexts and time, (2) Agency that is relational and enacted with others; (3) Agency that attends to the bounded-ness of  peoples, histories, cultures, and contexts (Chavez & Griffin, 2009); and (4) Agency that is strategic with regards to analyses of  power, long-term consequences, and appropriate forms of  action. Taken together, these dimensions can ultimately better equip learners to interrupt and transform unequal social conditions and, I argue, constitute the four necessary components of  “transformative agency .” What are ways that this comprehensive form of  transformative agency can be fostered in classrooms? What are ways that this comprehensive 
form of transformative agency can be fostered in classrooms? Some examples include leveraging human rights, peace, or environmental action clubs that can take action in schools and communities.EXPERT PIECES
that deepen the learnings of  participants, in a variety of  subjects. 
Many sports programs even integrate socio-emotional skills or peacebuilding lessons (such as Soccer without Borders, Border Youth Tennis Exchange, and the Hope through Hoops Program of  the Hi5 Foundation). Courses and afterschool/summer programs related to social issues and action, the arts, and leadership—such as programs like Global Kids, The Brotherhood/SisterSol or the Bay Area Solidarity Summer—would all be well-suited to greater integration of  the components of  transformative agency to better enable a more holistic approach to its cultivation. 
By fostering a sense of  transformative agency—informed by 
insights from diverse scholarship on sustained agency , relational agency , coalitional agency , and strategic agency—educators, youth, and families can explore gaps between rights and realities, and the necessary individual and collective work that can help achieve a more just society . Some examples include leveraging human rights, peace, or environmental action clubs that can take action in schools and communities. Students can also participate in international events such as the recent global youth-led climate strike in which millions in the past months have taken to the streets to demand attention to climate change and its impact on communities around the world. Other examples include children’s parliaments and student government that exhibit leadership in decision-making. Students can also be supported to engage in community efforts for social change ranging from public service projects to advocacy and activism for social justice. Such forms of  learning can support how students can live in the world as civic actors who know how to engage productively for the social good. Justice-oriented education that fosters transformative agency can begin at an early age, with more ability of  young people to explore systemic inequalities and violence usually by ages 12 and above. There are many forms of  integrating rights issues into existing programs in ways 
Components of
Tr ansformative
AgencySustained
AgencyCoalitional
Agency
Relational
AgencyStrategic
Agency
Apple, M. (1982). Reproduction and contradiction in education. In 
M. Apple (Ed.), Cultural and economic reproduction in education (pp. 1-31). London, Boston and Henley: Routledge and Kegan Paul.Aronowitz, S., & Giroux, H. (1993). Education still under siege. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.Bajaj, M. (2009). 'I have big things planned for my future': The limits and possibilities of  transformative agency in Zambian schools.Compare, 39(4), 551–568. Bajaj, M. (2012). Schooling for Social Change: The Rise and Impact of  Human Rights Education in India. New York: Bloomsbury .Chavez, K., & Griffin, C. (2009). Power, Feminisms, and Coalitional Agency: Inviting and Enacting Difficult Dialogues. Women's Studies in Communication, 32(1), 1-11. Bajaj, M. (2018). Conceptualizing Transformative Agency in Education for Peace, Human Rights & Social Justice. International Journal of  Human Rights Education 2(1), 1-22.Foley , D. (1991). Rethinking school ethnographies of  colonial settings: A performance Perspective of  reproduction and resistance. Comparative Education Review, 35(3), 532-551.Freire, P . (1970). Pedagogy of  the oppressed. New York: Continuum.Giroux, H. (1996). Fugitive cultures: Race, violence, and youth. . New York: Routledge.Giroux, H. (1997). Pedagogy and the politics of  hope. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.Hays, S. (1994). Structure and Agency and the Sticky Problem ofCulture. Sociological Theory , 12(1), 57-72. MacLeod, J. (1995). Ain't no making it. Boulder, Co.: Westview Press.Miron, L. & Lauria, M. (1998). Student voice as agency: Resistance and accommodation in inner-city schools. Anthropology & Education Quarterly , 29(2), 189-213Noguera, P . (2003). City schools and the American dream: Reclaiming the promise of  public education. New York: Teachers College Press.Noguera, P . & Cannella, C. (2006). Youth agency , resistance, and civic activism: The public commitment to social justice.  In Noguera, P ., Cammarota, J. & S. Ginwright (eds.) Beyond resistance: Youth activism and community change. (pp. 333-347). New York: Routledge. Noguera, P ., Cammarota, J. & Ginwright, S. (2006).
 
Beyond 
resistance! Youth activism and community change: New democratic possibilities for practice and policy for America's youth. New York: Routledge.
 
O’Connor
, C. (1997). Disposition towards (collective) struggle 
and educational resilience in the inner city: A case of  six African-American high school students. American Educational Research Journal, 34(4), 593-629.Shah, P . P . (2016). Agency as Negotiation: Social Norms, Girls’ Schooling and Marriage in Gujarat, India. In J. DeJaeghere (Ed.), Education and Youth Agency: Advancing Responsible Adolescent Development (pp. 85-102). New York: Springer Solorzano, D., & Bernal, D. D. (2001). Examining Transformational Resistance through a Crtiical Race and LatCrit Theory Framework: Chicano and Chicana Students in an Urban Context Urban Education, 36(3), 308-342. Wilcox, W ., Lazarre-White, K., & Warwin, J. (2003). Rites of  Passage: Preparing Youth for Social Change. Afterschool Matters, 3, 52–60.Willis, P . (1977). Learning to labour: How working class kids get working class jobs. New York: Columbia University Press.REFERENCESEXPERT PIECES
From Bajaj (2018)59But, why did the big companies withdraw? Was there something 
wrong with those educational video games? Weren't they appealing 
enough? Or was is it that the children were too lazy to learn? If  
you enter any gamer blog, you will find plenty of  answers. For 
example, regarding Mario Teaches Typing, Meowkie comments: 
“ As a kid, I was always really sad that the typing material wasn't 
Mario related :/” (YouTube, 2008) Or this blog title in thegamer.
com: “29 Ridiculous 90s Educational Video Games That Taught 
Kids Nothing” (Jurkovich, 2018). Most of  the games back then had 
problems with their game design. Many of  them were actually , drill 
sheets, multiple choice tests, drag and drop interactives, all disguised 
as video games.  
The clearest term to define this is: "Chocolate-covered broccoli." 
The term coined in 2001 by author Brenda Laurel in her book 
Utopian Entrepreneur, speaks to the idea that many forms of  
edutainment poorly integrate the entertainment part of  the 
equation—leading to a result that still tastes pretty bad, even though 
it has something really sweet right on top. (Smith, 2017)  
Big companies desisted from developing educational commercial 
games as they wanted revenue and educational products were not 
the golden goose. Nowadays, most educational video games are not 
really a subgenre of  this bigger industry; they have more to do with 
the educational services industry , with academic research within 
universities, or NGOs and foundations strategies, rather than with 
the multi-million investment of  the entertainment world. Who 
funds educational video games and on what purpose is 
sometimes the clue to understand how much they can Gargamel Estudio Founder and Director Kids W ant to Play Video 
Games, but Do They 
Want to Play Educational 
Video Games?
ELISA NAVARRO CHINCHILLA
EXPERT
PIECES
When speaking about video games, it’s quite common 
to listen at first, the impressive numbers around this 
industry: 2.2 billion players, almost one third of  the 
population worldwide; and an annual revenue of  $137.9 
billion dollars in 2018  (Newzoo, 2018). “The commercial 
appeal and success of  video games is often a part of  an argument 
promoting the use of  video games as learning tools” (Schrader, 
2010), but let's take it with a grain of  salt. There are many strategies to embrace games into schools: gamification, game based learning 
or use of  commercial games within learning processes are some 
approaches. But what about developing a whole video game 
specifically for one learning objective? Here we will focus on some 
affordances and drawbacks of  educational video games, especially 
for socio emotional learning (SEL) games.
Educational video games aren’t something new: The Sumerian 
Game/ 1966, Logo Writer/ 1967; The Oregon Trail/ 1971; 
are some initial examples. Fifty-four years have gone past 
and whilst  trying to understand their potential, terms such as 
“Serious Games” appeared, created by Clark C Abt’s in 1970; 
or “Edutainment”, previously used to define educational TV 
shows. The 80s and 90s was the golden age of  educational video 
games industry . Many games were launched by the big industry 
companies, such as the Mario’s educational series: Mario Teaches 
Typing, Mario is Missing; Sonic’s series; Reader Rabbit series; 
Math and Reading Blaster series, etc.  When speaking about video games, 
it’ s quite common to listen at first, the 
impressive numbers around this industry: 
2.2 billion players, almost one third of the 
population worldwide; and an annual 
revenue of $137 .9 billion dollars in 2018EXPERT PIECES
Educational Video Games 
Edutainment
Serious Games 
SELPlay
Video Game Industry
Developers Game DesignKeywords
A fifty-four-year-old history has taught us that video games 
are very powerful tools for learning. As developers of 
educational video games, we want to share what we 
have learned in the past ten years; especially around the 
experience of creating games for socio emotional learning, 
such as “Chuka” , a game on violence prevention developed 
for UNODC. We hope it might be useful for those who want 
to develop or promote the use of games for SEL.Abstract
61Literature has clearly shown that video 
games are very powerful tools for learning: they are great problem-solving tools where children can learn by trial and error, practicing in a risk-free virtual world. 
impact learning. Big commercial companies not only invest 
in the production, they also invest in distribution, advertising and maintaining the games, which is an unaffordable proposition for agents such as game developers.
 
F
ortunately , life is not only about money , and even if  educational 
games are not as profitable, we should definitely look at ways to develop them. Literature has clearly shown that video games are very powerful tools for learning: they are great problem-solving tools where children can learn by trial and error, practicing in a risk-free virtual world.  
Children learn by doing and they can advance at their own pace, receiving immediate feedback to guide them. Kids can immerse emotionally in fantasy worlds and learn from distant realities, past and present. Video games are great motivating tools: “long, hard, and challenging… Of  course, designers could make games shorter and simpler. That’s often what schools do with their curriculums. But gamers won’t accept short and easy games” (Gee, 2007).
 
R
esearchers espouse the educative properties of games 
(e.g., Gee, 2003; Schrader & McCreery , 2007; Squire, 2006; Steinkuehler, 2006; Y oung, Schrader, & Zheng, 2006). However, developers do not necessarily leverage the current knowledge base when creating games even though researchers’ arguments are abundant, convincing, and pervasive (Schrader, 2010).
Evidence from game based learning literature exhorts us to keep 
exploring ways to create good educational games. Here are a few useful insights to consider when making one:
1)We shouldn’t underestimate kids/players and try to
trick them with either “Chocolate-covered broccoli” or easy , non-
challenging games. Games should be “pleasantly frustrating” asGee calls them, and very fun.
2)We need to think about implementation before
educational games are even developed — who will really use them
and why would they use them? How will they receive the game?Are there lesson plans, implementing team, alliances with ministriesof  education, schools, teachers or parents?
3)V
ideo games are not diagnostic tools, unless they are really
mindfully designed to be one and players are aware. Even if  we canrecord all children's moves, right and wrong answers and have allthese data in beautiful dashboards with graphics, kids tend to play3)Role playing and avatars have
shown to be very powerful tools forself-awareness. “The sense in which
the player both is, and is not, the avatar,is central to the experience of  the game”(Burn, 2006). I can be someone else andme at the same time; which allows me toexplore how much of  me is in the avatar,therefor who am I and who I'm not.“Yet, on the other hand, there is a sensein which players merely accept and playout the roles determined for them by thegame texts devised by global corporations,dominated by patriarchal narratives”(Burn, 2006). When designing educationalvideo games, we should be aware of  notreproducing this “male-dominated powerrhetoric’s of  combative play” (Burn, 2006).
4)Games are rules systems
which enable understanding and
practicing rules and limits withinsociety . Following the game rules is anintrinsic part of  video games, if  you don’tfollow them you’re out of  the game, andthus will miss out on all the fun. .
5)Games are always a simple
version of  reality . Even with the most
advanced AI, we should always rememberthat games have been programmed and are limited to their design. This is very important when speaking about SEL, as choices, human reactions and emotions are simulated and limited to what has been programmed; it still doesn't have the richness, randomness or complexity of  life.
 
6)Online multiplayer games have
shown to be super powerful forcollaborative learning. Although this isnot the case for educational video games,except Minecraft edu, as developing thiskind of  games for educational purposesis very complex and expensive. However,collaboration versus competitiveness issomething to be considered in the designof  educational video games.
7)E
asier software with less need
on coding is now available. It is nowpossible for teachers to use simple softwarefor developing video games. Even better,having kids do their own educational videogames could be very powerful.
“Y
ou cannot play a game if you cannot 
learn it” (Gee, 2007). Games are exceptional tools for teaching. EXPERT PIECES
within the game.Therefore their answers might not correspond to what they would actually do in reality or what they would like to do, they are probably only testing a game mechanic or trying out to see what happens.
 
4)W
e should try to create new mechanics, new game
structures for educational games. Sticking a commercial mechanicinto an educational game feels disjointed. The educational objectiveshould be the game mechanic itself, let's move away from chocolatecovered broccoli.
5)We shouldn’t be trying to copy commercial discourse
if  we can create peaceful, collaborative, inclusive video games.
For example, “there are many game worlds where the highly“marked” or marginal, or altogether absent, gender is female”(Carr, 2006).
 
Developers of  educational videogames should avoid
reproducing such gender stereotypes, even though they may bepervasive in popular games, as it may unfavourably affect theirperception about gender roles and identity , among other things.
6)We shouldn’t be trying to copy commercial games look
in their scope and graphics, to be as appealing, especially if  there
are not enough resources to do so. For example: it's better to have agood 2D than a terrible 3D animation.
7)We should be very conscious about access to
connectivity and hardware to avoid making technology
another means of  reinforcing privilege and inequity . We shouldknow that in most school computers it’s very challenging to runheavy graphics and RAM demanding games.
S
ocio emotional learning video games are part of  all we have 
mentioned, however there are some special affordances and considerations to mention exclusively for this genre: 
1)Immersive narratives can create empathy towards the
unknown. Educational games are a subgenre of  “serious games”,
which is a huge term that basically comprises all those games that
have an extra interest beyond pure entertainment, such as political,social, climate awareness, etc. Many of  these serious games shareemotional personal experiences, as literature has done for centuries:stories on migration, gender discrimination, war experiences, livingwith a disability , etc. are a glimpse to the game themes we canfind. Some serious games might not be intended as learning videogames but they are definitely useful for SEL, as you get to step intosomeone else’s shoes and feel their emotions and experiences.
2)V
ideo games are excellent simulators for practicing.
Trying out your own emotions without having impact on real life isone of  the great affordances of  SEL video games. In the game wedeveloped we’ve seen kids trying out all sorts of  emotional reactionstowards violence, sometimes breaking some gender stereotypes:boys letting themselves feel like crying or girls being physicallyviolent.Ho wever developing a video game is a 
complex, expensive and time consuming process. So the question still remains, should we invest in developing educational games or should we stick to what commercial games offer, hoping something as useful as Civilization appears? And who should invest? Does it make sense to give tools to teachers and students to create their own? Does it complement or contradict the learning and curriculum demands? Schools invest in buying all-inclusive platforms. Can developers make unique games profitable and in which contexts? Although there are examples of  profitable educational games that really take into account the affordances of  the media, such as DragonBox, Fruit Ninja, etc.; but they are few and far between. The fact remains that most of  what passes off as educational games are actually edutainment apps in the mobile stores, that make conventional teaching “fun” by  adding colors and animations. Having said that, this shouldn’t discourage us from exploring the wonderful possibilities video games offer, especially now that mixed reality is almost about to become part of  our daily lives, offering possibilities to expand. 
Burn, Andrew. (2006). Playing roles. Computer games: text, narrative 
and play . Polity Press.
 
Car
r, Diane (2006). Games and Gender. Computer games: text, 
narrative and play . Polity Press.
 
Gee
, James Paul (2007). What video games have to teach us about 
learning and literacy . Palgrave Macmillan.
 
J
urkovich, Tristan (2018).
 
https://www
.thegamer.com/video-games-educational-taught-kids/
Newzoo (2018). “Mobile Revenues Account for More Than 50% of  the Global Games Market as It Reaches $137.9 Billion in 2018”https://newzoo.com/insights/articles/global-games-market-reaches-137-9-billion-in-2018-mobile-games-take-half/Schrader, P .G.; Lawless, Kimberly; Denis, Hasan. (2010). Video games in education: opportunities for learning beyond researchers’ claims and advertising hype. Design and Implementation of  Educational Games: Theoretical and Practical Perspectives. Hershey , PA : Information Science Reference.
 
Smith, Er
nie. “Educational Video Games Just Never Got Things 
Right” Vice.https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/78y4g9/educational-video-games-just-never-got-things-rightREFERENCESEXPERT PIECES63Educational Consultant, Puducherry , India 
Research Assistant Professor, Oklahoma State University , Tulsa, OklahomaReimagining Science 
Teaching for Low-income Children
NIRMAL GOVINDRAJU
EXPERT
PIECES
1. Intr oduction
This article summarizes preliminary observations which show 
that children from low-income backgrounds often labeled as "poor performers" or "slow-learners", when given a structured environment where they are allowed to explore and construct their understanding in a scaffolded manner, are capable of  assimilating, creatively applying and communicating science concepts at, or above, grade levels in short periods of  time. 
1.1.  Status of Indian School Education India has one of  the largest school going populations in 
the world, with approximately 340 million children of  school going age ("C-13 single year age returns", 2011). About 70% live in rural areas and a similar number attend Govt. schools. While the school enrollment rate (~97%) is at a record high, the quality of  education is abysmal. It is estimated that approximately 27% of  children in Grade VIII cannot read Grade II text, and 56% of  the children in Grade VIII cannot perform 3-digit-by-1-digit division ("Annual Status of  Education Report", 2018).India is also far behind in cultivating critical thinking, problemsolving and communication skills in children. For instance, Indiawas second last in a group of  73 countries (Singh, 2019; Chappia,2012) in the 2009 round of  Programme for International StudentAssessment. Such continued dismal performance will have negative repercussions on economic, cultural, social, and technological development.
1.2.  Challenges Faced by Children and T eachers in the 
Classroom
It is beyond the scope of  this article to discuss the complex web 
of  issues which lead to poor learning in the majority of  Indian classrooms. However, there are several common concerns raised by students and teachers across multiple geographic locations.
1.3.  Common issues raised by children 1. Lack of  voice and activity in the classroom - often
articulated by students as teachers "talk too much", or by sayingthat they do not like the "lecture method" of  teaching.2. Hectic schedule. Packed, rigid "timetables" preventchildren from engaging in play , exploring and applyingtheir learning. Children often articulate this issueby saying that they have "hectic" schedules and lack"breaks" between classes.3. Onerous syllabus and lack of  conceptualunderstanding. Voluminous textbooks and burdensome
syllabus do not give students the time and space to understandand apply concepts. These issues coupled with poor reading andnumeracy skills lead students to complain that they are not able to"understand questions or answers in their exams."
1.4.  Common issues raised by teachers 1. Non-academic workload. Teachers often voice their
frustration about being burdened with non-academic duties whichtake away time from working with students.
India has one of the largest school 
going populations in the world, with approximately 340 million children of school going ageEXPERT PIECES
Low-income Children
'Slow Learner'Science EducationKeywords
Indian school education fails to equip students with critical thinking and problem-solving skills. Lack of such training stymies holistic social, economic, and cultural development. Hence, there is a dire need to develop approaches for critical thinking and problem solving in the current reality of the Indian classroom which includes poverty, poor pre-service and in-service teacher training, vast and burdensome syllabus, inadequate facilities, geographic diversity, and so on. This paper explores possible approaches for addressing this need for low-income children in Grades VI - IX in the context of science learning. It is shown that even within the constraints of the current education system, children with significant conceptual and language gaps are capable of assimilating and applying complex science concepts. By constructively involving teachers in developing and refining these approaches, it will be possible to harness children’s innate ability to imagine, explore and innovate for the benefit of the nation and the world.Abstract
652. Socioeconomic stressors. Children in poverty are often
subject to abuse, neglect, undernourishment, unstable homes,migration, crime, exploitation, and other challenges which lead to ahost of  behavioral and cognitive issues in the classroom. Pre-serviceand in-service training fails to equip teachers with the requisite skillsto deal with these extremely challenging issues.3. Academic Issues. Poorly thought through or executedpolicies and processes often stymie the work of  well-intentioned, hardworking, and creative teachers. Issues raised by teachers under this category include curricular overload and misaligned assessments which test for recall, deputing teachers not trained in subject areas for teaching science, large classroom sizes, a single teacher having to teach multiple grades in multiple subject areas, mandatory professional development which does not align with teacher needs, school management and government education system focusing on "exam performance", and lack of  effective support. 4. "Slow-learners." Teachers often complain of  "slowlearners" to describe any child who is not able to "pay attention"or "perform" in classroom. The indiscriminate use of  this termtraditionally used to describe children who have lower than averageintelligence quotients (IQ between 70 and 85) but do not haveintellectual disability (IQ less than 70) ("Slow learner FAQ", 2020).This misconception stems from a lack of  understanding of  how children learn, and correspondingly low awareness of  the spectrum of  learning difficulties and disabilities. Therefore, there is a strong possibility , as discussed below, that many children labeled as "slow" or "poor performers" may in fact be highly intelligent, but are not inclined to learn by the "paper and pencil" approach.
In summary , there are host of  issues which even well-meaning 
teachers face in helping children learn. Therefore, there is a dire need to devise approaches which will help teachers support students' learning within the constraints of  the current education system in India. The rest of  this article provides an outline of  the principles and their application which will help children develop critical thinking and problem solving skills in Indian classrooms.
There is a dire need to devise approaches 
which will help teachers support students' learning within the constraints of the current education system in India.2. Meaningful Science
L
earning in the Conte xt of
the Indian Clas
sroom
2.1.  Core Principles
The following core principles underlie 
the preliminary work with children and teachers discussed in the following pages.
a) Scientific "method" and "real-
life" connect. Through discussionand practice, help children understandthat science is a process through whichthey can iteratively construct and applysophisticated conceptual understandingusing simple day-to-day life experiencesand materials.b) Children discover and constructconcepts. With textbook as the basis,
provide opportunities for children toconstruct, test, and evolve their conceptualunderstanding in the classroom throughstructured, scaffolded questions and child-driven demonstrations. The instructor's role is mainly focused on guiding the thought processes of  the students. c) Peer-learning. Tap into peer-learning mechanisms and providediverse opportunities for children tocommunicate their understanding.
2.2.  RationaleConnecting everyday phenomena to 
textbook conceptual content enables children to organically see connections between seemingly "difficult" and "esoteric" concepts and their daily life. Children also implicitly understand the complex connections between different concepts and learn to apply them using simple everyday materials thereby increasing self-motivation, confidence, communication skills, and concept retention. Since the concepts are textbook-based and involve peer-learning, it reduces the effective teaching time and burden. Since children pick concepts of  their choice, the difficulty level is "pegged" to a level sufficiently interesting and challenging for the children. Also, by giving children a free hand on how they choose to construct their knowledge, children with different modes of  learning are effectively able assimilate and apply concepts.
2.3.  Student GroupsThe "Core Principles" outlined above 
were used in different contexts with approximately ~250 children, including:
a) Group 1: approx. 30 tribal girls (Grades
II - XII).b) Group 2: approx. 65 orphaned anddestitute children (Grade VI).c) Group 3: 40 low-income rural childrenfrom residential schools (Grade IX).d) Group 4: approx. 120 urban low-income children (Group VI).The work with the above groups ofchildren was done in different geographicallocations between June 2018 - June 2019.EXPERT PIECES
PHYSICS CHEMISTRY BIOLOGY MATH
Earthquakes, winds, storm, 
cyclone, lightning
Light, Light as Energy , Why we 
see only one side of the moon?
Sound
Chem, Effects of Electric Current, 
Flow of ChargeMole, metals and 
Non-metals
Chemical Formulae and 
Equations
Ionic ReactionsClassification
Diversity
Nitrogen Cycle
Cell Structure and Function, 
Tissues, sexual reproductionGeometry Problems, Mensuration
Comparing Quantities, Factorization
Linear and Alg. Equations, 
Identities, Polynomials
Fundamental integer operations, 
Exponents, Rational and Irrational 
numbers, Compound InterestTABLE 1: LIST OF 'DIFFICULT' TOPICS (GRADE VIII), BY SUBJECT AREA, 
COLLATED FROM STUDENTS AND TEACHERS
EXPERT PIECES
67Most of  the children had significant 
literacy , numeracy and conceptual knowledge gaps, and Group 3 children (from rural residential schools) were in fact labeled by their teachers as "slow learners" who were "average" or "below average" in classroom "performance." While the instructional approach varied based on context, the core principles and patterns of  learning remained same across groups. In the interests of  brevity , a brief  summary of  the work done with Group 3 children is discussed below.
2.4.  Application of core principles 
for "slow learners" 
Group 3, Grade IX children, considered 
as "slow-learners" were spread across three independent two-day workshops held in different locations in India - Bengaluru, Karnataka (20 students), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh (12 students), and Dist. Kamrup, Assam (8 students). On Day 1 the children, along with their teachers, discussed their perceptions of  science and what they felt they "liked" and "did not like" about learning science and math. Teachers and students were also asked to list "difficult topics" in these subjects (see Table 1) from Grade VIII.  On Day 2, students and teachers were split into groups, were assigned one "difficult" topic per group and were given ~2 hours to develop their ideas on specific concepts of  their choice within the topic. To simulate resource constraints, the groups had to develop and present their ideas with a limited number of  low-cost locally available items given to them. Textbooks were available and everyone was free to talk to their peers. Students and teachers were not allowed to talk to each other. The student groups were asked structured, probing questions to help them focus their thought process, and elicit answers from them. In general, no conceptual or design help was provided.
2.5.  ResultsAcross all three locations students classified 
as "slow learners" did an outstanding job of  creating, demonstrating and presenting "projects" on "difficult" topics with limited materials and only 2 hours of  time. Few highlights are given below.
a. Demonstrated "proof" of  laws of
reflection on plane and curved surfaces byusing a protractor, the polished metallic leg of  a chair and a laser pointer.b. Fashioned a kaleidoscope with plasticsheets, waste cardboard, and an LED (Fig 1).c. Developed a creative way of  showingthat force causes an object to move. Thestudents fashioned wheels out of  cut papercups, an axle with post it notes and pastedplastic bottle caps on the axles so thatwhen water falls on one of  the caps, itcauses the axle and wheels to rotate (Fig 2).d. Inferred: (i) that sound is caused byvibrations, (ii) relative speed of  sound indifferent media, (iii) basics of  acousticimpedance and dampening.
2.6.  ConclusionsGiven a structured environment, 
where students are allowed to explore and construct their understanding in a scaffolded manner, children from low-income backgrounds, and diverse geographic locations often considered as "slow learners" or "poor performers" consistently show outstanding creativity and ability to assimilate and apply science concepts at, or above, grade level. By co-opting motivated teachers in low-income schools, it will be possible to help children learn and apply science concepts in challenging environments.
3. A cknowledgements
The author would like to thank UNESCO MGIEP for supporting part of  the work reported in this article. 
Head of Pedagogy 
42UNESCO MGIEP TECH 
2019 - CASE STUDY42
OLIVIER CROUZET
EXPERT
PIECES
42 is an information and communication technology (ICT) 
school that first became operational in Paris, France, and has now expanded across ten countries. It is tuition free, with no degree requirement, it targets anyone above 18 years old with an ICT talent to train them and lead to the labor market as an ICT professional. 42 is based on the peer-learning approach, where students are posed with software development challenges which they need to resolve without the help of any teacher, lecture or any MOOC. Learners seek information, learn how to filter and then use it to co-create software. Collaboration is a key element of this process. With a gamified approach that encourages a try-and-fail experimental model, 42 develops both technical and soft skills required by companies. In a labor market which is driven by a high demand of skilled ICT professionals, 42 brings its students to a successful and sustainable career.Abstract
The Project
42 was created in 2013 by Xavier Niel, who is the owner of  one 
of  France’s four big telecom companies. The main purpose of  School 42 is to support the French e-economy by providing more ICT trained people and bridge the skill gap. As our French public education system is failing to close this 
gap, and has not been successful in developing the new expected skills for this 4
th industrial revolution, 42 chose a unique pedagogical 
model which allows students with an aptitude for ICT to be trained, EXPERT PIECES
Annual Status of  Education Report, Pratham Foundation. (2018). 
Retrieved from http://img.asercentre.org/docs/ASER%202018/Release%20Material/aserreport2018.pdfC-13 single year age returns by residence and sex. (2011). Retrieved from https://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/C-series/C-13.htmlChhapia, H. (2012, August 3). India backs out of  global educationtest for 15-year-olds. Retrieved from: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/India-backs-out-of-global-education-test-for-15-year-olds/articleshow/15332715.cms?referral=PMSingh, D. (2019, December 23). How to teach mathematics in schools. Retrieved from https://www.newindianexpress.com/opinions/2019/dec/23/how-to-teach-mathematics-in-schools-2079755.html?utm_source=DailyhuntSlow learner FAQ. (2020). Retrieved from https://schoolpsychologistfiles.com/
slowlearnerfaq/
REFERENCESEXPERT PIECES
Fig 1: Kaleidoscope made of by children 
without using mirrors.Fig 2: Gadget built by children to illustrate effects of forces.69
independent of  their origin, their personal situation or their past 
academic performance. 
The peer-to-peer learning model is inspired by the works 
of  Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget, French pedagogue Celestin Freinet and Italian educator Maria Montessori. Our approach is a blend of  practice, project-based learning and collaborative learning. There are no teachers, no lectures or any online video. The students are posed software development challenges where they need to create pieces of  software. But they do not receive any hints or recipe. It is each student’s job to search for information and then filter this information. Indeed, there could be some doubt regarding information they find, whether it is true or false, relevant or irrelevant. Testing all these small elementary bricks allows them to select the correct ones for the task. Usually , this cannot be done alone and demands the students to debate, collaborate and exchange ideas on how they understand the subject, and how to resolve it. The emphasis is on creating collective intelligence, and bring in new hypothesis. At the end of  this trial and error approach, the project is completed. 
Then comes the peer evaluation. Every project is evaluated by 
five other students. In case the project could not be completed, the project is retried, and registers no progression. In case of success, the next project(s) is/are unlocked to allow moving forward in the curriculum. Also, each successful project yields some 
points for experience that add up to the general level of  a student, allowing the student to meet eventually 4 out of  17 skills defined by In traditional education, there is stigma 
attached to failure. In a gamified approach, however, students can try , fail and try again multiple times until they get to the next level, which legitimizes trial and error learning.EXPERT PIECES
The first part of the curriculum is standardized across all the 42 campuses, which covers a minimal set of ICT skills and soft skills that is required of an entry level professional experience such as internships. the curriculum. This is part of  a larger gamification mechanism: 
just like in video games, students start at level 0 and with more than 200 projects available all along the curriculum, they progress up to level 21. The gamification also includes coalitions (houses like in Harry Potter), quests, achievements and badges. It is a motivation lever for the students and encourages employing the trial and error method. In traditional education, there is stigma attached to 
failure. In a gamified approach, however, students can try , fail and try again multiple times until they get to the next level, which legitimizes trial and error learning. 
Therefore, the peer-to-peer learning model not only develops 
ICT skills but also their key soft skills such as adaptation, problem solving, collaboration, self-learning, critical thinking and creativity . In five or ten years, our students will face new technology , new problems, and they will need to adapt to keep their job. The learning context created in 42 is similar to the project culture in many startups, and encourages an agile mindset necessary for thriving in an unpredictable age.Selection Process 
The selection process gives equal opportunities to all applicants irrespective of  their backgrounds. The selection process is rigorous and inclusive, and allows anyone to test their ICT aptitude, regardless of  their educational or social background. The selection process is divided into two parts in progressive order. First there are two online games that are similar to coding. After clearing the first part, applicants can proceed to access the Piscine sessions which consists of  4-weeks-long immersive test that allows theapplicants to discover coding and whetherthe peer-to-peer learning pedagogicalmodel is for them. It includes some verybasic C programming exercises to discoverand learn the essentials of  programming:functions, variables, loops, conditions,recursivity , simple string and memorymanagement.
The Curriculum 
The first part of the curriculum is standardized across all the 42 campuses, which covers a minimal set of ICT skills and soft skills that is required of an entry level professional experience such as internships. This also leads to possible campus exchanges, and cross campus projects.
Students learn about the C programming 
language and develop simple software using classic algorithms such as recursivity , linked lists, sorting, memory management and string manipulations. The POSIX API allows file system access, while Unix processes management, network coding and threads. They learn about simple network and system administration approach such as IP , subnet, DNS and Docker. Object oriented programming is introduced, completed by a client-server project. This first part of  the curriculum ends with a complete web project using a random framework among classics such as Rails, Symfony , Django, and so on.
During this first part, students can progress 
at their own pace. This is designed to allow students to do a part-time job to earn a livelihood, as well as allow slower students to fully develop their skills. However, students have a maximum of  1 year and a half  to complete this first part. Failing to meet this deadline, nicknamed the Blackhole, has serious consequences. The student is then required to leave the school. However, in actual cases, with the help of  a unique tool, students have the option to freeze the curriculum, up to three times, for a maximum period of  six months.
 
T
he second part of  the curriculum 
covers classic ICT topics such as Artificial Intelligence, security , graphics, functional programming, networking & cloud, system 71Educator, Writer, 
Game DesignerThe Ludic Century: 
How Games and Play 
might Help Dismantle 
the People Factory
PAUL DARVASI
EXPERT
PIECES
administration, advanced Unix/Posix programming, advanced web 
programming, mobile development, data management, Kernel 
programming and gaming. Each student is free to choose his or her 
specialization in two or three topics, or to have a more general ICT 
knowledge. Students can also opt for internships, side projects with 
companies, entrepreneur program, partnerships with students in 
business schools, arts and design schools and so on. This part of  the 
curriculum emphasizes several soft skills such as teamwork through 
group projects, adaptability and professionalism required to work in 
companies, so that students remain relevant and productive even as 
they become experienced professionals in their fields, 5 or 10 years 
down the line.
Once students have become gainfully involved in the labor market, 
they can decide when they want to end their course and become 
alumni. Even in case they do not progress enough in 42, they will 
automatically become alumni after a period of  inactivity .
The Outcome
Internships have been a key quality indicator. Many companies 
have used our platform to offer jobs and internships to 
students who reach the requirement for a professional 
experience. The demand is twice as high as the supply , which 
reflects not only the high demand for such professionals in 
the market but also assures high quality of  our trained young 
professionals. 
The alumni network provides access to events, services and 
connections that support all 42 alumni in their professional life. It also promotes 42 among the companies, explaining the 
possible output profiles of  the students, based on an overall level 
achieved and skills developed though the curriculum, to facilitate 
recruitment. Those alumni who want to keep a strong connection 
with 42 can be involved in specific pedagogical activities as well. 
Finally , the alumni network compiles statistics on salary growth in 
the course of  the careers of  our former students.
Conclusion
T oday , School 42 has 14 campuses across several countries 
beyond France namely , USA, Belgium, Netherlands, Finland, 
Russia, Morocco, Spain, Brazil, Japan, Korea and more to come. 
The high scalability of  the peer-learning model allows for an easy 
setup and deployment of  the full system. Over the years, School 42 
has created a worldwide community of  learners and alumni. While 
promoting a different educational approach for a digital revolution, 
the 42 Network aims to become one of  the largest networks of  IT 
campuses and learners in the world.
We strongly believe that, like every other field of  
economy or society , education must change its 
paradigms and undergo a digital transformation. 42 is a 
working example of  what can be done, and many others schools, 
in all the learning topics, should exist and offer new approaches. 
Ultimately , a fully individualized learning path, fitted to everyone’s 
needs, time, capabilities and talents, where you will cross other 
learners’ path and interact to co-create — that is our vision for the 
future of  education. In the past decade, games have emerged as a potent 
social and economic force. The video game industry’s 
annual revenue now surpasses film and music, and we are 
currently experiencing a global explosion of board games, 
card games, role-playing games, and mobile games. Far 
from a fad, games are a direct cultural expression of our 
computer-centred world. Computers have cultivated a 
climate of interactive and individuated participatory media 
emblemized by games, which stand in stark contrast with 
passive spectatorial media such as film and television. 
Games, then, are characteristic of our current cultural 
paradigm and game-like dynamics will have a growing 
influence and shape social institutions and practices, 
including schools. Schools were designed and largely 
continue to operate according to an industrial template 
that has fallen out of step with a rapidly changing society. 
However, as games and game-like dynamics become 
increasingly woven into the social fabric, we can anticipate 
that schools will also follow suit and transition to approach 
learning in a manner that is individuated, choice-based, 
participatory, playful, and dynamic: all features of a good 
game.Abstract
The Ludic Century is upon us, where games and game-like 
experiences increasingly permeate our lives. Global video 
game revenue now surpasses that of the film industry , board 
game cafes are cropping up in cities all over the world, and 
gamification is infiltrating everything from corporate training to 
airline loyalty programs. In his “Manifesto for a Ludic Century”, EXPERT PIECESEXPERT PIECES
73renowned game designer and scholar Eric Zimmerman forwards 
the notion that culture and society will increasingly operate 
according to game-like paradigms. But, why now? Why games? 
And, more pertinently , how does this bear on the future of  teaching 
and learning?
Before we advance the proposition of  a world infused by games, 
let’s step back for a brief  historical detour. Since the inception 
of  the industrial revolution three hundred years ago, the factory 
has occupied the symbolic, economic, and material centre of  the 
modern world. Look around: most of  the objects in our midst and 
their attendant economies are the product of  factories. The engines 
of  industry not only produced an abundance of  goods, but also 
shaped some of  our most important institutions. French philosopher 
Michel Foucault argues that prisons, hospitals, and schools were all designed to function with the logic of  a factory . In schools, students 
are annually conveyed along the assembly line and, at each stage, 
they receive a program of  uniform instruction. Critiques of  schools 
are nothing new, and are well warranted, but it’s also important to 
remember that we are indebted to the imperfect industrial systems 
for mass education and widespread literacy . However, as we 
endure the environmental and social fallout of  mass-
produced consumer culture and are confronted by the 
structural limitations of  school that have barely inched 
forward in 150 years, it is clear that we are long overdue 
for a change.
As the factory continues to chug along, its heir apparent, the 
networked computer, has efficiently grown to occupy the center 
of  culture, society , and production. Much as the factory’s imprint 
molded so many modern institutions, the computer will also 
reshape the world in its own image. Unlike the uniform, large-
scale material replication of  its predecessor, computers are 
dynamic information systems that are personalized, interactive, 
participatory , rule-based, and flexible. Now, substitute the word 
“games” for “computers” in the last sentence and their affinity 
becomes strikingly apparent. In his brief  manifesto, Zimmerman 
even ascribes causality with the notion that “computers didn’t 
create games; games created computers.” It’s intriguing to think As we endure the environmental and 
social fallout of mass-produced consumer 
culture and are confronted by the structural 
limitations of school that have barely inched 
forward in 150 years, it is clear that we are 
long overdue for a change.EXPERT PIECES
Can we imagine a future 
where grades by age-
grouping are desegregated 
and each person follows 
their own learning path as 
they level-up at their own 
pace?that chess and senet may be early ancestors 
of  the modern microprocessor, and that 
the pebbles for the first abacus were the 
very same the Greeks used for a round of  
petteia. 
Whether or not games gave rise to 
computers is certainly debatable, 
but what is clear is that the two are 
intertwined expressions of this moment 
in history . Our zeitgeist is coloured by 
computers and games, and this is by no 
means limited to digital games, as we 
witness an explosion of  board games, 
mobile games, card games, escape 
rooms, LARPS, alternate reality games 
and countless other manifestations of  
ludic entertainment that are enjoying 
unprecedented popularity . Games are also 
used to incentivise health, personal finance, 
productivity management and even to 
motivate kids to brush their teeth. Far 
from fads, these may be harbingers of  a 
historical shift that will increasingly weave 
the functions and dynamics we associate 
with games into the socio-cultural fabric. 
The effects could touch every aspect of  life, 
but my interest here is only a brief  sketch 
of  how this might look for education.
I have experimented extensively with 
integrating all types of  games - including 
commercial video games - in diverse 
instructional settings. The results are 
promising, to say the least, but the 
meaningful change will occur when the 
instructional settings themselves transcend 
their industrial constraints and restructure 
according to more gameful dynamics. 
The spectatorship that characterizes 
industrial media also informs industrial 
education. Much like newspapers, film 
and television, professors and teachers 
lecture for the passive consumption of  
their captive audience. It’s no coincidence 
that lecture halls and movie theaters share 
almost identical designs. However, largely 
due to computers, we transitioned to 
what media scholar Henry Jenkins terms 
‘participatory culture’, where, rather 
than merely spectating, we also interact 
and produce. This is the case with social 
media, YouTube, online forums and, 
most notably , games. Like computers, digital and analog games are necessarily 
participatory . We learn best by doing, and 
a pedagogy of  participation underpins the 
maker movement and popular student-
centred initiatives like inquiry-based 
learning; however, much work remains to 
reconfigure school systems to align with 
the participatory ethos.
Interactivity and engagement often 
involve choice and, in games, players 
make choices which differentiate their 
experiences and outcomes. Similarly , the 
availability of  meaningful choices and 
options offers a vision of  learning that 
surpasses the constraints of  the assembly 
line and genuinely caters to the strengths, 
interests, and abilities of  the individual. 
Can we imagine a future where grades 
by age-grouping are desegregated 
and each person follows their own 
learning path as they level-up at their 
own pace? Rather than being dragged 
along the conveyor belt of  classroom 
instruction, they might instead have the 
opportunity to detain themselves on 
concepts, passions, and skills to be more 
deeply explored and mastered. Choice 
can also be exercised in how one 
will be assessed, how one’s learning 
might be reported, how learning can 
be tailored to specific communities, 
and how one might design a unique 
but flexible learning path. This vision 
may seem idealistic, but no less so than a 
school today would seem to a nineteenth 
century child working 60 hours a week in 
a mill.
In Homo Ludens, Dutch cultural 
historian Johan Huizinga reminds us 
that even animals learn through play . 
However, coercive and economically enforced labor is a prominent feature of  
industrial production; the human body 
bends to become a component of  the 
manufacturing machine. Likewise, schools 
also grew to employ tactics of  enforced 
labor to condition minds and bodies. 
Tight schedules, bells, and concentric 
circles of  discipline optimize the efficiency 
with which we cram information into 
the supple minds of  our youth. What 
is often lost in the grind of  the learning 
machine is nature’s preferred methods 
of  learning: play and exploration. Play 
can be hard work, but it doesn’t feel that 
way . Where labor pushes, play draws and 
invites. Play accommodates a ranging 
mind to a ranging world, where hard laws 
are replaced by soft rules. The ancient 
Romans so connected play and instruction 
that their schools where called ludi from 
singular ludus, a word which means 
play and learning. Games are designed 
play , and some of  their structuring 
characteristics could be grafted to redesign 
instructional environments to channel the 
power of  play .
Media philosopher Marshall MacLuhan 
maintains that technologies do not 
disappear in obsolescence, but are 
absorbed and live concurrently with their 
successors. Books were absorbed by radio 
that was absorbed by television and film 
and, in turn, they were each absorbed by 
the Internet. In every case, each medium 
not only amalgamated, but continued to 
co-exist. Likewise, industrial labor and 
the mass production of  learning will 
not completely disappear, but persist in 
conjunction with the emerging paradigm. 
Scholar Julian Kücklich’s portmanteau 
term playbour captures an ethos that 
marries play and labor and, with the 
proliferation of  computers and AI, we can 
hope for a genuinely individuated forms 
of  mass education. Factory schools 
are starting to buckle under the 
pressures of  the Ludic Century , and 
the sooner they succumb, the sooner 
we can save the legion of  youth from 
a grinding system that is rapidly 
descending into irrelevance. EXPERT PIECES75
Amit Goyal,
Head edX, India & South East Asia
Christopher Piech, 
Professor of Computer Science at Stanford University , USA
Ehsan Hoque,
Asaro-Biggar Family Assistant Professor of Computer Science at the University of Rochester
Harri Ketamo, 
Founder & Chairman, Headai
Shadi Abou-Zahra, 
Accessibility Strategy and T echnology Specialist, W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI)
Stuart McNaughton,
Professor of Education at the University of Auckland and Director of the Woolf Fisher Research Centre/ T e Pūtahi Whakatairanga Hapori Ako Angitu
Cathleen Norris, 
Professor & Chairperson, Department of Learning T echnologies, University of North T exas
Dan Shefet, 
Lawyer at the Paris Court of Appeal (France)
Gregoire Borst, 
Professor of Developmental Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience of Education, LaPsyDE, France
Michael Witbrock, 
Cycorp
Shane O’Connor, 
Versatile facilitator, trainer and educator
CATALYTIC SPEAKERS:
Data, Learning Data, Learning 
& Education& Education 
Role of AIRole of AI
DATA SCIENCE, in general, &  MACHINE 
LEARNING, in particular, has caught the imagination of the world and the field of education too has seen widespread utilization leveraging ‘narrow’ (specialized) AI such as automated grading, adaptive learning, individualized content discovery at scale.  AI could instantly help discover an astounding amount of information, curate supplementary learning resources to meet individual student interests and needs, provide teachers with a virtual teaching assistant, and allow students to connect with peer learners as well as a virtual peer or tutor wherever and whenever needed. The collective wisdom of teachers and students could be garnered to expand the realm of possibilities for education.KEYNOTE: 
Common Sense in the Age of AI by Michael 
Witbrock, Cycorp
CATALYTIC SESSIONS:Individualized Learning at Scale - 
Oxymoronic or Utopian Reality (Computer Human Interaction)
T echnology with Emotions - But we are 
talking about Bots right?
Big Entry Barriers - Battle of Perceptions 
(Data Privacy & Ownership)
Is T echnology Socially , Educationally & 
Culturally Agnostic?THEME III :77CATALYTIC SESSION 3
Individualized 
Learning at Scale 
Oxymoronic or Utopian 
Reality (Computer Human Interaction)
Individualized learning in itself  is a complex task. It presents even greater challenges when we intend to scale globally . The only way till now scaling has been achieved is through standardization and the same seemingly is paradoxical to individualization. To create truly inclusive learning envi-ronments, ability to acknowledge and express learner’s indi-viduality in a virtual environment is paramount. Adapting virtual environments to the learning needs of  an individual has traditionally been the domain of  experts, making it ex-pensive and logistically challenging to do at scale. The same in the past has led to inequity in educational outcomes. This session invited speakers to share role of  emerging technol-ogies like reinforcement learning, semi-supervised learning, natural language processing, computer vision etc. that may be critical to provide personalized education at scale. The session focused on sharing of  real-world scenarios where this gap between seemingly paradoxical concepts has been bridged leveraging technology .CATALYTIC SESSION 6 
Technology with 
Emotion
But We Are T alking About 
Bots right?
In this new world, a combination of  human and computing intelligence has the potential to deliver a higher quality education, where human responses and emotions are pivotal. Thus, understanding a learner's affect throughout the learning process is crucial for understanding motivation. New developments in cognitive science are unravelling the mysteries of  emotions; the findings have much to teach us about how students do—or do not—learn. This session focused on exploring the role of  affective computing in the context of  virtual learning environments. The session also delved into some practical considerations to alleviate concerns over how technologists can prove efficacy and safeguard student privacy .SESSION DESCRIPTOS
CATALYTIC SESSION 9 
Big Entry
Barriers
Battle of Perception
(Data Privacy & Ownership)
It’s impossible to determine the success of  technology in the learning context until it is finally integrated and used effectively in the classroom. The root cause of  the same is less of  a technical issue than it being an issue of  perception. Technology giants too haven’t helped their case by blatantly violating basic user data privacy , as recent media coverage suggests. This has resulted in educators being hesitant in incorporating technology into their teaching plans, demon-strating that technology integration is still facing a great deal of  resistance. Without utilizing these excellent tools to their maximum capabilities, educators can’t be sure what technol-ogy , especially AI, can offer to learners or where it truly falls short. This session brought to light the various non-tech-nology factors that are affecting the adoption of  technology within the education ecosystem. Panellists explored factors such Data ownership, Data privacy , Data localization, Transparency in monitoring competency and performance from both educator and learner’s points of  view to ensure that technology can be leveraged to reduce our mechanical workload and make us think deeply as to what makes us truly ‘human’.CATALYTIC SESSION 12
Is Technology 
Socially, Educationally & Culturally 
Agnostic? 
One of  the barriers inhibiting adoption of  technology 
globally is the perceived inability of  technological tools and systems to understand contextual nuances like that of  cul-ture, geography , language etc. In the highly nuanced world of  education, can technology be truly leveraged for in-depth changes in the way learners learn? Can there still be certain best practices that can be shared across various contextual silos that help learners globally learn from each other’s triumphs and failures? The session delved into the state of  the art technological advancements that hold the promise of  doing just that including deep dive in the field of  Machine Translation, Natural Language Processing, Universal Design of  Learning (UDL) in context of  breaking culture, geogra-phy and language silos.
SESSION
DESCRIPTORS79
EXPERT PIECES
M.A. Candidate in Cyber P olicy
Stanf
ord University , CA
lisae@stanford.eduAssistant Professor of Computer Science
Stanford University , CA piech@cs.stanford.eduA Vision of AI for 
Joyful Education: Research Goals to Avert Danger and Maximize BenefitsEXPERT
PIECES
LISA EINSTEIN & CHRIS PIECH
Introduction
In 2013, Facebook launched an initiative to provide free, 
basic internet to the world and thus spread opportunity and interconnection [1]. However, the Human Rights Council reported that in Myanmar this program accelerated hate speech, fomented division, and incited offline violence in the Rohingya genocide [2]. Free, basic internet now serves as a warning of  the complexities of  technological impact on society . For Chris, an AI researcher in education, and Lisa, a student of  cyber policy , this example gives pause: What unintended consequences could AI in education have?Many look to AI-powered tools to address the need to scale high-quality education and with good reason. A surge in educational content from online courses, expanded access to digital devices, and the contemporary renaissance in AI seem to provide the pieces necessary to deliver personalized learning at scale. However, technology has a poor track record for solving social issues without creating unintended harm. What negative effects can we predict, and how can we refine the objectives of  AI researchers to account for such unintended consequences?
For decades the holy grail of  AI for education has been 
the creation of  an autonomous tutor: an algorithm that can monitor students’ progress, understand what they know and what motivates them, and provide an optimal, adaptive learning experience. With access to an autonomous tutor, students can learn from home, anywhere in the world. However, autonomous tutors of  2019 look quite different from this ideal. Education with auto-tutors usually engages students with problems designed to be easy for the algorithm to interpret – as opposed to joyful for the learner. Current algorithms can’t read motivation, and are far from engendering long-term learning gains, instead focusing on engaging students for the short-term. The technical challenges are enormous: building the ideal auto tutor could be as hard as reaching true General AI. The research community has seen this as a challenge: we simply need to overcome our technical shortcomings to achieve the utopian dream.
But is the auto-tutor utopia a dream worth building toward? In 
this paper we offer some dangers that arise from use of  artificially intelligent systems such as auto-tutors and call for research into approaches that harness the potential good from application of  AI in education, while mitigating the risks. We believe our vision of  thoughtfully developed AI systems working in tandem with naturally intelligent humans can support a broad community of  learners around the world.
For decades the holy grail of AI for education 
has been the creation of an autonomous tutor: an algorithm that can monitor students’ progress, understand what they know and what motivates them,and provide an optimal, adaptive learning experienceArtificial intelligence (AI) has great potential to improve 
learning globally. But, is the contemporary direction of research building towards the useful, joyful education that we dream of for the next generation? The ultimate goal of research into AI for education is often imagined as the creation of a truly intelligent autonomous tutor – and the AI research community has been making steady progress towards this goal. However, as we get closer, it seems apparent that we haven’t fully engaged with the potential harms AI tutoring could cause and rarely raise the question of how AI tutors would support communal learning. In this paper we outline key dangers and desiderata in AI education research. We then put forth a set of short-term challenges for the research community that we believe maximize benefit and minimize risks of applying AI in education. We open this conversation up to the AI research and policy community, broadly imagined.Abstract
81EXPERT PIECES
Three Dangers of Integrating AI in Education
1. Undermining socio-emotional connections and skills
Students go to school for many reasons outside of  rote knowledge 
acquisition, including development of  socio-emotional skills, human mentorship, and human community . For all the potential inadequacies of  human teachers and traditional classes, displacing these structures has costs. Many of  us remember learning from teachers whose mentorship and guidance extended far beyond the subject they were charged with teaching. Might AI displace these interactions?
Furthermore, loneliness is on the rise, with younger generations 
lonelier than older generations [3]. One study found a relationship between depression among adolescents and screen time, compared to youth who spent time on offscreen activities such as in-person social interactions, sports, or homework [4]. Decreased screen time could lead to significant gains in empathy levels [5]. As UNESCO considers reorienting goals of  education to emphasize development of  socio-emotional competencies that allow for peaceful and sustainable societies, compelling children toward screens may undermine those goals [6].
1Yet AI systems tend to be designed to maximize the time students spend online. Even executives who develop addictive technologies understand these risks, as many send their children to expensive screen-free private schools for “the luxury of  human interaction,” while poorer students are pushed toward cheap technological solutions [7]. Even as these solutions become more sophisticated, they could hurt students. For example, personalized learning modules powered by AI could undermine vital meta-learning skills such as the ability to self-regulate, as students might adapt to machines doing the work of  regulating their attention and fail to cultivate their own capacity to do so. Likewise, students might lose the ability to adapt independently to creative tasks in the real world that do not provide immediate feedback or guidance.
Meanwhile, the disruption AI introduces in the classroom could Students go to school for many reasons 
outside of rote knowledge acquisition, including development of socio-emotional skills, human mentorship, and human community .extend into homes and communities. Authority figures including 
teachers and parents may not adapt easily to a curriculum ported entirely onto digital devices, no matter how much “humanity” such technologies display . This resistance could be stiffest in traditional communities living in poverty , where some see the greatest potential impact from AI technologies, as families unaccustomed to children spending time on screens may resist the shift from human mentorship to AI tutors.
The tradeoff between increased knowledge acquisition in exchange 
for less human-led learning is especially negative if  it turns out that the tools are not as good at improving knowledge as we hoped. Given the vital role that motivation plays in learning and the technical challenges we have yet to overcome, that is a distinct possibility .
2. Misuse of  AI in education to extend powerWe must also consider the possibility that malevolent actors will 
harness newly powerful and motivating educational tools to teach violent subject matter. In the same way Facebook’s rise amplified both destructive and democratic organizing, newly effective teaching tools could help terrorists scale trainings about acts of  destruction. Moreover, the goal of  developing human-like empathy in AI-tutors will require processing deeply personal data on the learners’ emotional and psychological states. Will oppressive governments use troves of  psycho-emotional data on citizens from the time they are school children for persecution or power consolidation? Or, seemingly more benign: will the rich just get richer?
While advocates tout the potential for AI-enabled educational tools 
to democratize education globally , researchers must consider how these tools can perpetuate or increase inequality . Privileged groups with access to digital tools become the source of  training data for current AI algorithms. When machine learning algorithms train on a certain data set – perhaps one in which white students from the United States are overrepresented – the result might be biased against groups from other backgrounds and therefore might be ineffective or even discriminatory when used on a different group.
Furthermore, scaling education by means of  a centralized model 
reduces the number of  voices who decide what is taught. Given that teaching is also a good learning tool for those who teach, this choice of  who gets to teach becomes a choice of  who gets to learn. Yes, providing new tools in communities that barely have access to textbooks will offer access to knowledge. However, scaling centrally advocated curricula can enforce homogenous learning goals and disempower local knowledge-providers. It is possible that communities will simply reject the technologies altogether. As Taskeen Adam put it, “ As technology penetrates communities globally , so do neoliberal values, . . . where local, cultural or religious values are given second place, if  they fit in at all” [8]. Failing to take into account local voices into account will render technologies irrelevant, or even useless to communities where education gaps are the greatest, who may reject the technologies altogether, thus increasing the inequality they seek to correct.
3. Infringement on children’s rights: lack of  data privacy
and cyber security
The challenge of  how to use vast amounts of  personal data for 
personalized learning while protecting individual privacy and preferences rise to dangerous levels when AI targets young learners who cannot yet consent to collection of  their personal data, and learners of  highest need who may not understand the risks of  sharing their personal data or interacting with anonymous strangers online. Platforms that connect learners around the world are no utopia to those who spend time moderating online interactions. “Everywhere there is online exchange and children, there is child exploitation,” says Alex Stamos, Facebook’s former Chief  Security Officer [9]. Security researchers colloquially call this the “Lego penis problem,” referring to a Lego MMO (massively multiplayer online game) that allowed users to create and share Lego structures. Users started building penises from Legos and shared these with other players. Workers at the company lamented their inability to “detect dongs” at a rate fast enough to prevent the sullying of  their child-friendly brand. Ultimately , content moderation that remained compliant with the U.S. Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act proved too expensive and may have played a role in the game’s shut down [10].
According to Stamos, every platform from Lego to Roblox to 
Fortnite experiences various types of  child exploitation, and exploitation will likely be exacerbated in communities less familiar with the internet. To fulfill the promise of  online education supporting least developed countries, researchers must account for security of  new users of  online tools against malicious actors expert at taking advantage of  even the most sophisticated users. 
T owards a Better Vision
The presence of  risks does not need to remove our optimism; instead it can be a force for developing a more mature goal. Many have painted a vision of  a better education system [11]. We call on the AI research community and the education policy community to collectively imagine a set of  grand challenges in AiEd that better align with our dreams for education and better take into account risks. We offer six goals for discussion, and invite the public to join the conversation.
We will crowd source new ideas here 
(with authorship credit): http://bit.ly/aiEdVision
EXPERT PIECES
1Goal 4.7, a subset of  Sustainable Development Goal 4, advocates for education that promotes sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality , promotion 
of  a culture of  peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of  cultural diversity and of  culture’s contribution to sustainable development.83AI to facilitate more (and 
higher quality) human learning
interactions AI could be developed 
to support educators and the education 
system through automation of  tasks and 
development of  exciting problems, rather than by replacing teachers. Teachers and tools can work in tandem: with teachers filtering useful suggestions from AIs, and tools supporting teachers in grading and tracking students [12].
AI to generate inspiring problems 
AI can also help with the creation anddissemination of  interesting problems 
in local contexts [13]. Machine learning 
can create paintings that look like works 
of  Rembrandt. Can we also use algorithms to create engaging, personalized activities? This synthesis could establish a rich eco-system of  teaching and learning with social and emotional interactions bolstered, not replaced by , technology .
Low data feedback for inspiring 
problems Inspiring, open-ended
assignments provide opportunities for 
exploration and creativity . However 
these problems are expensive to incorporate 
and scale in education. It is time consuming for teachers to provide feedback. AI can assist teachers if  designed to support and provide feedback for these sorts of  questions, however, current methodologies require datasets of  trillions of  students to enable meaningful AI-driven feedback on open-ended work. We need to learn to do so without consuming massive amounts of  student data. This is both practical and risk minimizing. Low- data AI seems promising and lowers risks of  data abuse [14]. Low-data is practical in that solutions wont have to wait for millions of  students to act as guinea pigs on each assignment to train our algorithms.Conclusion
AI has great potential to further joyful learning, but only if  the concerns discussed are appropriately addressed. Jointly , the education policy community and researchers developing AI tools to be deployed on a massive scale have a serious responsibility . We must collectively consider the range of  possible applications of  our technologies, including harmful ones, and the effects they will have on peace and human development. We proposed a vision oriented around six AI-challenges to mitigate these potential harms and promote human flourishing through AI, and invite the public to join in the conversation. Education AI may seem like an unmitigated good, however in this field, as in medicine, the Hippocratic oath applies: first, do no harm. AI to understand process AIcurrently is most effective in teaching 
rote, structured lessons rather than 
supporting the creative, open-ended, 
team-based learning necessary to flourish in the modern world. A current line of  research focuses on understanding process and ability to learn rather than merely the final product [15]. It is impossible for a teacher - especially in large classroom - to keep tabs on every student in the way a piano teacher provides feedback on a student’s hand positions. AI-powered tools could work in tandem with teachers to monitor process, while the teacher remains the coach, averting the dismantling of  schooling environments that allow for social-emotional learning. A hybrid model of  artificial and human intelligence could help teachers gain insights about student process, elevating the teacher as a coach and mentor.
AI for translation of  educational 
content Distribution of  content has
been uneven, especially for low-
resource languages. Natural language 
processing, a branch of  AI, is well-
positioned to support translation which could help provide inclusive education in locations that need it most and encourage development of  relevant educational technology built with communities from the ground up rather than imposed by the West.
AI-powered detection for child 
safety A healthy amount of  energy
should be put into devel- oping 
content moderation tools that scale, 
so online spaces of  learning are safe for 
all learners (e.g. from malicious images), especially children and those in vulnerable contexts.EXPERT PIECESEXPERT PIECES
01 04
05
0602
03[1] Mark Zuckerberg. Is connectivity a human right. Facebook
Newsroom, 20, 2013.[2] Human Rights Council. Report of  independent international fact-finding mission on myanmar OHCR, 2018.[3] US Cigna. Loneliness index (2018). Survey of, 20.[4] Jean M Twenge, Thomas E Joiner, Megan L Rogers, and Gabrielle N Martin. Increases in  depressive symptoms, suicide-related outcomes, and suicide rates among us adolescents after2010 and links to increased new media screen time. Clinical Psychological Science, 6(1):3–17, 2018.[5] Yalda T Uhls, Minas Michikyan, Jordan Morris, Debra Garcia,Gary W Small, Eleni Zgourou, and Patricia M Greenfield. Five days at outdoor education camp without screens improves preteen skills with nonverbal emotion cues. Computers in Human Behavior, 39:387–392, 2014.[6] United Nations. Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda forsustainable development a/res/70/1. In UN General Assembly , 2015.[7] Nellie Bowles. The digital gap between rich and poor kids is not what we expected. The New York Times, 26:2018, 2018.[8] Taskeen Adam. The role of  technology in education for building peaceful and sustainable societies. The Blue Dot, 8:61.[9] Alex Stamos. Interview with alex stamos. Lisa Einstein, 2019.[10] Tom Phillips. Lego mmo development dogged by "dong detection" software. Eurogamer.net, June 2015.[11] Edgar Faure et al. Learning to be: The world of  education today and tomorrow. Unesco, 1973.[12] Lisa Wang, Angela Sy , Larry Liu, and Chris Piech. Learning torepresent student knowledge on programming exercises using deep learning. In EDM, 2017.[13] Angelica Willis, Glenn Davis, Sherry Ruan, LakshmiManoharan, James Landay , and Emma Brunskill. Key phraseextraction for generating educational question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of  the Sixth (2019) ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale, page 20. ACM, 2019.[14] MikeWu, Milan Mosse, Noah Goodman, and Chris Piech. Zeroshot learning for code education: Rubric sampling with deep learning inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01357, 2018.[15] Lisa Yan, Annie Hu, and Chris Piech. Pensieve: Feedback on coding process for novices. In Proceedings of  the 50th ACM.
REFERENCES85Director of NeuroLab (FCI) 
University of Quebec in Montreal, CanadaMoment-by-Moment 
Measures of Affect and 
Cognition in Learning
JULIEN MERCIER  
EXPERT
PIECES
Why trying to reach the 1-second threshold?
The goal of educational research in the perspective of cognitive 
science is the optimization of learning, that is, learning more 
in less time. Since the 1950’s, the promise of  cognitive science in 
education is that a complete specification of  the mechanisms of  learning is the best way to engineer the most efficient supports for 
learning. This specification is achieved through data and methods 
which evolved with their parent scientific disciplines (observations 
of  behavior, classical computer simulations, think-aloud protocols, 
The goal of educational research in the 
perspective of cognitive science is the 
optimization of learning, that is, learning 
more in less time. EXPERT PIECES
Cognitive Science
Data Science
CognitionAffect
Learning
PedagogyKeywords
Learning more in less time is a pervasive goal in educational 
research and practice. We argue that more fine-grained, 
moment-by-moment information about the learner and 
its context is currently the best way to move education 
forward. This paper discusses the potential and pitfalls of 
this approach, along with the state of the art with respect to 
key elements. Whereas technology for data acquisition and 
analytic procedures are available, the relevant theories are 
relatively thin, and the generalization of experimental results 
remains a major issue. Interdisciplinary work is a necessary 
precondition to this approach and therefore an important 
outcome is moving towards transdisciplinary work, and thus 
cross feeding other fields.Abstract
stimulated recall, next-generation computer simulations including 
artificial intelligence and psychophysiological information 
including brain imaging). Key to this endeavor is obtaining 
data about the mechanisms of  learning as they occur, 
from the briefest and simplest to the most complex and 
slow, in order to reconstruct the learning experience 
in its entirety from underlying “building blocks” (see 
Anderson, 2002). 
Obtaining moment-by-moment information about the learner and 
the learning context aims at establishing causality from empirical 
87evidence. The idea is to go beyond the 
pretest-posttest inferences in traditional experimental work in education, which are limited to attributing learning gains to an intervention comprised of  many elements typically implemented over a long period. By finely examining and extracting the active ingredients within a learning activity , the approach can unveil more causality , and points directly into the examination of  temporal causality through an emphasis on sequential information. The potential of  this approach is best exemplified by decades of  research on intelligent tutoring systems (ITS). In his synthesis of  this research, VanLehn (2011) has shown that a 1-second reactivity from a tutor leads to better learning. Whereas work on ITS focused on cognition in a relatively closed context, the current challenge is to capture more of  the learning experience by including all relevant aspects of  affect and cognition in more natural contexts. Consequently , modelling the learning context with that same level of  detail becomes necessary . With so much potential, the question is: do we have the prerequisites for using this approach in educational research?  
The following sections examine the required technology , methodology and theory . In conclusion, some insights are offered based on our years of  intensive work to develop this approach.
Do we have the technology to get the data?
Getting information every second means going beyond self-report questionnaires and tests, think-aloud protocols and observations. Usually , data points at sub-second measurement frequencies need to be collected. To this end, brain-imaging techniques such as electroencephalography (EEG) and other psychophysiological sensors (electrodermal activity , electrocardiography , blood pulse, skin temperature, pupillometry) as well as eye-trackers provide low-level (in the sense of  bodily) objective signals indicative of  cognitive and emotional processing (Holmqvist, Nyström, Andersson, Dewhurst, Jarodzka, & Van de Weijer, 2011; Boucsein, 2012; Potter & Bolls, 2014) . This technology has been around for years, but progresses very rapidly , especially with respect to low-cost equipment (see Sazonov & Newman, 2014).
It is worth mentioning that for the time 
being, costly high-end EEG equipment is warranted for research purposes. Low-cost EEG devices come with their proprietary algorithms for decontamination and interpretation (usually in the form of  metrics referring to psychological constructs) which are usually not fully disclosed and open to peer review; raw data are hardly available; data quality is generally a problem due to idiosyncratic and tricky setup methods; electrodes positioning is usually not standard (i.e. 10-20 international system) or not guaranteed because of  the physical design of  the device. It can be concluded that the technology necessary to reach the 1-second threshold is available, but costand scientific credibility are issues. Withappropriate equipment, standard setupand data-preparation procedures must befollowed, along with the most stringentcriteria, in order to cope adequatelywith limited movement (in contrast tono movement) and experiments that aremore prolonged (hours instead of  tens ofminutes).
Do we have the methodologies for analysing the 1-hz data?
Firstly , multiple data streams must be synchronized, the precision being set by the most frequent data stream (for The five components of 
emotions constituting major theories of emotion identified by Sander (2013) are amenable to 1-hz data. example, 1000 Hz, or the millisecond). 
Computer systems can be engineered to be pre-synchronized, or alternatively , data streams can be synchronized manually after data collection.
Then, data preparation includes 
decontamination and rejection according to the state of the art as well as transformation from the native format of the device into a format appropriate for an integrated database.
The operationalization of  psychological 
constructs can be either bottom-up (starting with patterns in the data) or top down (starting from theory). A bottom-up approach can be realized using common machine learning algorithms, especially those that remain robust despite lower number of  observations, such as long-term short-term memory (LSTM). The top-down approach is currently limited in the number of  constructs available in the literature, but the interest of  these constructs in education is tremendous (e.g. cognitive load, valence, arousal, visual attention)
An aspect that is more an issue than a 
problem is that reactivity , in the sense of  rate and amplitude of  variation of  the constructs measured, must be maintained. Usually , data are downsampled during the operationalization of  constructs. Some procedures will take as input data in 1-hz epochs. Additionally , some procedures use a moving average window ranging from a few seconds to tens of  seconds in length (see Holm, Lukander, Korpela, Sallinen, Müller, (2009) and Pope, Bogart, & Bartolome, 1996 for widely used examples). Therefore, researchers must be careful in preserving, assessing or reporting the final time scale of  the data. 
Do we have the theories to interpret the data?
The answer is yes and no. The current theories of  affect, cognition and learning were essentially developed using data differently from 1-hz data. While theories exist to explain part of  affect, cognition and learning, models linking objective bodily reactions to a more subjective experience are scarce, despite compatible modern theoretical views in cognitive science, such as extended cognition (Kiverstein, 2018). Moreover, theories linking affect, cognition and learning, in ways appropriate to formulate theoretically-sound and testable hypotheses are non-existent. 
Affect. From psychophysiology to subjective. The five 
components of  emotions constituting major theories of  emotion identified by Sander (2013) are amenable to 1-hz data. Among them, autonomic reaction, expression, and action 
tendency are clearly captured by the approach, whereas appraisal and feeling may require more subjective data.
Cognition. From cold and isolated to hot and embodied (4 E). The integration of  the science of  affectivity within cognitive 
science or as a complementary discipline is still open to debate; nevertheless, cognition is now seen as constantly interacting with affect (Sander, 2013). Thus, methodologies (namely computational modelling) to study affectivity or cognition have converged, so that theories merging both can be postulated and tested. The field is ripe conceptually but the operationalization of  constructs and the analysis of  data still need to evolve.
The Learning Context. Irrespective of  the pedagogical 
approach, a learning context can be characterized as a 
hierarchical decomposition of  more or less fine-grained transactions between a learner and aspects of  the context. These may include learning tools (materials, computers) 
or agents (teachers, peers, computer tutors, games, reactivity or interactivity).EXPERT PIECES
EXPERT PIECES89Data quality is paramount
Continuous data is always interpreted by 
relating multiple channels. As such, missing data in only one channel in a given period of  time means not being able to consider this episode (in other words, missing data on one channel means unusable data on all concurrent data). Moreover, establishing the causality of  how events unfold in time requires a complete record of  events. An incomplete recording could mean excluding all the data for this unit of  analysis. Interdisciplinarity is key
Psychophysiological and brain-imaging data are complex signals that require highly qualified personnel for: (1) the mathematical transformation of  data and the programming of  scripts (computer science), (2) the theorization of  research questions and interpretation of  the results (cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience), (3) the orientation, contextualization and knowledge transfer of  applications to optimize learning (learning sciences and education), (4) integration into the state of  the art in a specific field (domain experts). Synchronization during data 
collection is better than post hoc synchronization
Technically , it could seem that putting 
the effort in engineering a system is a huge, one go task and that post hoc synchronization is a recurring, smaller burden. In practice however, and despite being conceptually rather simple, synchronization is a very complex technical problem, which is prone to human error. Thus, one has to be very careful of  hidden problems, which can be quite subtle. It was found that engineering an integrated  system and constantly monitoring its performance leads to reduced costs in data preparation, (minor) cumulative improvements in addressing idiosyncratic sources of  asynchrony (offsets and drift), and a sense of  reduced doubts regarding hidden problems through slow evolution and frequent cross-checks of  a stable suite of  diverse pieces of  equipment (hardware and software). 
• Dynamic research field attracting a lot of  interest: Holy grail of  the learning sciences• Focus on continuous, uninterrupted fine-grained objective measures detrimental to a
consideration of  the subjective experience
• You will get tons of  data, tons of  ideas for data mining, not many means for interpreting
empirical results
• Obtaining scientifically-valid data means that you will care about your costly equipment• Beware of  the mind-reading business• This kind of  research is not cheap both in terms of  equipment and manpower• This field needs interdisciplinary because of  obvious challenges, but is also a catalyst of
interdisciplinarityLessons Learned from Trying to T each the 1-second Threshold for 5 Y ears
Take HomeMessagesGeneralization of results is 
intricate, not even firmly conceptualized
In principle, generalizing involves an 
empirical appreciation of  spurious results (obtained by chance) and a conceptual assessment of  the correspondence between the context in which the results were obtained and a new context of  application of  those results. Fine-grained information about learning presents challenges with respect to these two considerations, sample sizes are limited because of  the labour-intensive data preparation and is highly contextualized to a specific situation. In addition, the statistical inferences go beyond the traditional analysis of  variance techniques: the nature of  the data both permits and require additional techniques to fully capture relevant information. Among those that were tried, sequential analysis, chaos analysis and machine learning approaches blur the traditional trilogy of  sample size, power, and effect size used to understand the generalizability of  statistical inferences. As a discussant told us once (Pekrun, personal communication, August 2017): Is this approach limited to quantitative case studies? Interdisciplinarity is hard
Although the cross-fertilization across disciplines fosters innovation, this potential comes at a cost. The prioritization of  research objectives, the conceptual clarity across fields, diverging assumptions about the value of  empirical research and criteria of  scientificity , as well as the unequal tradition or capacity for translational research subsume a constant need for clarification, negotiation and operationalization at every step of  the research.  Because of  this, “highway research” is not possible. However, we have not found a better way to train the next generation of  researchers: students graduate with a broader expertise and above all, are sensible to the merits and pitfalls of  the state of  the art in many related disciplines.EXPERT PIECES
The compromise between 
experimental control, ecological validity and data quality is complex and not ideal
This is especially true when aiming 
to publish in the best journals. Many popular low-cost devices were tried in hope to go beyond the lab, that is, getting data in natural contexts for prolonged periods of  time (imagine a lecture) with certain amount of  mobility (a teacher moving around or students sitting at their desk). Eye-tracking studies with mobile equipment (costing $40,000 a piece) are feasible if  the researcher is prepared to work (both conceptually and technically) with dynamic regions of  interest. EEG studies, however, are always affected by missing data due to movement (typically 50% + or – 10%) and a relatively thin conceptualization (analysis of  synchrony or use of  proprietary algorithms opaque to scientific scrutiny). In short, working with EEG requires good, costly equipment, tethered to a computer.  
Boucsein, W . (2012). Electrodermal activity (2nd ed.). New York, 
NY , US: Springer Science + Business Media. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-1126-0Holm, A., Lukander, K., Korpela, J., Sallinen, M., Müller, K. M. I. (2009). Estimating brain load from the EEG. Sci. World J. 9 639–651. 10.1100/tsw.2009.83Holmqvist, K., Nyström, N., Andersson, R., Dewhurst, R., Jarodzka, H., & Van de Weijer, J. (Eds.) (2011). Eye tracking: a comprehensive guide to methods and measures, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.Kiverstein, J. (2018). Extended Cognition. In A. Newen, L. De Bruin, & S. Gallagher (Eds). The Oxford Handbook of  4E Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University PressPope, A.T ., Bogart, E.H., Bartolome, D.S. (1996). Biocybernetic system evaluates indices of  operator engagement in automated task. Biological Psychology 40, 187-195.Potter, R.F . & Bolls, P . (2012). Psychophysiological Measurement and Meaning: Cognitive and Emotional Processing of  Media. New York
 
: 
Routledge. DOI
 
: https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203181027
Sazonov, E., & Newman, M.R. (2014). Wearable Sensors: Fundamentals, Implementation and Applications. Academic PressVanLehn, K. (2011): The Relative Effectiveness of  Human Tutoring, Intelligent Tutoring Systems, and Other Tutoring Systems, Educational Psychologist, 46:4, 197-221. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2011.611369REFERENCES91Assistant Professor of Computer Science
University of RochesterAI to Improve
Unique HumanAbilities
M. EHSAN HOQUE
EXPERT
PIECES
Introduction
Recent advances in robotics, AI and machine learning are 
increasingly focused on mimicking or even surpassing human capabilities. This particular innovation has serious implications on our future workforce. Approximately 51% of  the tasks done in the US economy can be automated (Bughin et al., 2017), and for each robot on the factory floor, some six jobs are lost (Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2017). This phenomenon will have worse implications Scenario 1: 
JOB INTERVIEW
Scenario 3: 
PUBLIC SPEAKINGScenario 2: 
PEER SOCIALIZATION 
Scenario 4: 
SALES TRAININGEXPERT PIECES
in developing countries whose manpower is a significant part of  their GDP . The need for manual labor in predictable and repetitive work is declining, while the demand is soaring for expertise in creative tasks, problem-solving, and other social-cognitive avenues of  soft-skills (Alabdulkareemt al., 2018). Many of  the critical and challenging tasks of  the human civilization requires humans to collaborate with others (Milojevic, 2014), and perform creatively at both individual and collective levels. Is there a room for technology to help sharpen these 
basic human skills? 
Madhu, a technically gifted college junior, worries about being declined from internship offers this year and believes he needs to improve his interview skills. After a 15-minute session with a career counselor, he receives recommendations to maintain more eye contact with the interviewer, conclude the interview with a friendly smile, and use intonation and loudness effectively to express enthusiasm. Madhu returns to his dorm room with an understanding of  several behaviors that he can improve for his upcoming interviews. He wishes to practice with and receive feedback from a counselor, but due to scheduling conflicts and the counselor’s limited availability , this is difficult. He is also unwilling to ask his peers for help in fear of  social stigma.Bobby , a young teen diagnosed with social anxiety disorder, faces challenges when engaging in face-to-face communication. Bobby is unsure of  various social “rules,” such as deciding turns when to speak, making eye contact, and knowing when to smile in a conversation. His difficulties in social interactions have only been met with taunting, bullying and rejection from his peers. As a result, Bob decides to retreat into a virtual online world. Bob enjoys practicing conversation and making new friends online, but he still craves physical face-to-face interactions. He wishes that he could somehow practice nuances of  social interactions in his own environment. He desires to be in a position where he may control the pace of  the practice, train as many times as he would like, and still be in full control of  the interaction.   
Mary is a graduate student who often attends conferences in order to present her papers to the scientific community . She is excited to talk about her work, but she feels incredibly nervous during public speaking. Despite practicing her talk with her research group, and receiving feedback from her peers and advisors, she ends up speaking too quickly for the audience during her presentation. She finds she is unable to accurately project her true excitement for research through her body language. She would love to improve her public speaking skills, but is unsure of  how to seek help.Alvina is a sales representative who video conferences with 15 clients every week. During the last few months, Alice has not succeeded in achieving her sales quota in comparison to her colleagues. While she uses the same script as her colleagues during the sales call, her success rate is below average. Alvina is eager to take the necessary steps to improve her sales skills and would like to objectively understand what she is doing differently in comparison to her colleagues. She is afraid of  being compared to them.  At the same time, she would like to receive personalized feedback in order to improve.
Let us consider the following scenarios:
The four scenarios share two commonalities: 
1) A person desires help to improve his or her nonverbal behaviors
2) Limitations such as resources, logistics, and social stigma impedethe person’s ability to obtain the personalized support or traininghe or she seeks (Mohammed Ehsan Hoque & Picard, 2014). Isit possible to create a technology that could help individuals like Madhu, Bobby , Mary and Alvina improve their social skills using an automated, system that is available ubiquitously — where they want and when they want?AI
EmotionHuman AbilitySoft SkillsKeywords
This article describes new technological systems that may process and analyze rich streams of real-time nonverbal information – including facial expressions, intonations, and gestures – and provide personalized feedback to learners. The technology may be customized in order to help individuals improve and enrich the quality of their nonverbal and collaborative communication. The system we propose and present can operate in the cloud in a highly accessible way that is scalable, yet protects the confidentiality of sensitive behaviors, allowing users the comfort and practice needed to advance their social skills. Abstract
93To address these challenges, we have developed a suite of  
prototypes that are standardized, repeatable and objective and can be deployed outside of  the lab environment. In the paragraphs below, I provide brief  descriptions of  each of  them.   
ROC Speak to help with public speaking: 
An  early prototype that couples computer algorithms with human intelligence in order to automatically sense and interpret nonverbal behavior. Called ROC Speak (available at rocspeak.com), the framework is cloud enabled and ubiquitously available via a web browser and has been validated in the context of  public speaking (Fung et al., 2015). The system automatically captures audio and video data in browser through the user’s webcam, and then analyzes the data for smiles, movement, and volume modulation. The framework allows users to opt in and receive subjective feedback from Mechanical Turk workers (“Turkers”) or any online users. ROC Speak synthesizes the Turkers’ interpretations, ratings, and comment rankings with the machine-sensed data and enables users to interact with, explore, and visualize personalized and presentational feedback. Our results provide quantitative and qualitative evidence in support of  our proposed synthesized feedback, relative to video-only playback with impersonal tips.
MACH to help with job interviews:
MACH—My Automated Conversation coacH—is a novel system that provides ubiquitous access to social skills training (Mohammed E. Hoque et al., 2013). The system includes a virtual agent thatreads facial expressions, speech, and prosody and responds withverbal and nonverbal behaviors in real time. This paper presents anapplication of  MACH in the context of  training for job interviews.During the training, MACH asks interview questions, automaticallymimics certain behavior issued by the user, and exhibit appropriatenonverbal behaviors. Following the interaction, MACH providesvisual feedback on the user’s performance. The developmentof  this application draws on data from 28 interview sessions,involving employment-seeking students and career counselors. Theeffectiveness of  MACH was assessed through a weeklong trial with90 college undergraduates. Students who interacted with MACHwere rated by human experts to have improved in overall interviewperformance, while the ratings of  students in control groups didnot improve. Post experiment interviews indicate that participantsfound the interview experience informative about their behaviorsand expressed interest in using MACH in the future.
LISSA to help with individuals with autism:
Understanding and exhibiting appropriate social behavior is difficult for individuals diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Many people with ASD are in the average range of  intelligence (that is, high-functioning) and often want help in improving their conversation skills. LISSA was designed as an exploratory experiment, undertaken to determine the feasibility of  using an autonomous conversational agent to help teenagers with ASD to practice and eventually , to improve their conversational skills. The fully automated conversational agent that we employ is a version of  LISSA(Ali et al., 2015), adapted to help those with ASD. Using the automated version of  the system, we ran a pilot study with five teenagers with ASD. Our study shows that a virtual agent can appear human-like and engaging in its dialogue behavior, from the perspective of  teenagers with ASD. Our system conducts a natural conversation with the teenagers, while at the same time providing both continuous feedback about the appropriateness of  the user's prosodic and nonverbal behavior and post-session feedback in a simple, easy-to-interpret format. Based on the information collected from the users through interviews and a questionnaire about the system, we gained some initial insights into the strengths and weaknesses of  our approach for the target population as well as some sense of  the variation in user reactions to a system of  this type.
a)
MA
CH System (Mohammed E. Hoque et al., 2013)
b) Rhe
ma system for live feedback (Tanveer et al., 2015)
c) LIS
SA system(Ali et al., 2015)(Zahra et al., 2016)
Figure 1. Examples of  prior systems developed by the PI and his students that can provide live and post feedback for job interviews, public speaking and helping individuals diagnosed with autism.
I argue that while developing AI that to mimic or even surpass human intelligence is an excellent technical challenge, the better 
(and more difficult) goal is to design AI that improves human ability/intelligence. With the growing trend of  automation 
taking over much of  the manual labor, there will be need for a workforce with more creative ability , teamwork, storytelling, and empathy . In this article, I provide some examples of  early work targeted to improve some unique human ability . With these examples, we hope that more applications of  AI improving human ability may emerge.  With the growing trend of automation 
taking over much of the manual labor, there will be need for a workforce with more creative ability , teamwork, storytelling, and empathy . EXPERT PIECES
Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P . (2017). Robots and Jobs: Evidence from 
US Labor Markets. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2940245Alabdulkareem, A., Frank, M. R., Sun, L., AlShebli, B., Hidalgo, C., & Rahwan, I. (2018). Unpacking the polarization of  workplace skills. Science Advances. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aao6030Ali, M., Crasta, D., Jin, L., Baretto, A., Rogge, R., & Hoque, M. E. (2015). LISSA- Live Interactive Social Skill Assistance. LISSA- Live Interactive Social Skill Assistance.Bughin, J., Manyika, J., Woetzel, J., Mattern, F . M., Chui, S., Lund, A., Madgavkar, S., Ramaswamy , J., Cadena, A., Dobbs, R., George, K., Gupta, R., Hazan, E., Labaye, E., Leke, A., & Nyquist, S. (2017). A Future That Works: Automation, Employment, and Productivity . McKinsey Global Institute.Fung, M., Jin, Y ., Zhao, R., & Hoque, M. E. (2015). ROC Speak: Semi-Automated Personalized Feedback on Nonverbal Behavior from Recorded Videos. Proceedings of  17th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp).Hoque, Mohammed E., Courgeon, M., Martin, J., Mutlu, B., & Picard, R. W . (2013). MACH: My Automated Conversation coacH. International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp 2013).Hoque, Mohammed Ehsan, & Picard, R. W . (2014). Rich Nonverbal Sensing Technology for Automated Social Skills Training. Computer, 47(4), 28–35. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2014.98
Milojevic, S. (2014). Principles of  scientific research team formation and evolution. Proceedings of  the National Academy of  Sciences of  the United States of  America. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1309723111Tanveer, I., Lin, E., & Hoque, M. E. (2015). Rhema
 
: A Real - Time 
In - Situ Intelligent Interface to Help People with Public Speaking. Intelligent Users Interfaces (IUI).Zahra, R., Ali, M. R., Smith, T ., Schubert, L., & Hoque, M. E. (2016). The LISSA Virtual Human and ASD Teens: An Overview of  Initial Experiments. 16th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents.REFERENCESEXPERT PIECES
a) MACH System (Mohammed E. Hoque et al.,
2013)Figure 1. Examples of  prior systems developed by the PI and his students that can provide live and post feedback for job interviews, public speaking and helping individuals diagnosed with autism.
b) Rhema system for live feedback (Tanveer et al., 2015) c) LISSA system(Ali et al., 2015)(Zahraet al., 2016)95Lawyer at the Paris Court of Appeal 
ParisDAN  SHEFET
EXPERT
PIECES
Has the frantic pace of technological progress 
caused us to arrive at a junction where we need to develop a new philosophical, ethical and legal standard to measure and attribute    
 
account
ability for the nefarious consequences 
of tech and especially the internet?
Who is responsible for harmful content and for the use of  the net's 
infrastructure to peddle illicit goods, facilitate incitement to violence and exchanges between perpetrators of  criminal acts?
Who is responsible for societal harm caused by unfettered use of  AI 
(leading to bias, inequality and societal disruption)?
Obviously authors of  iniquitous content and acts are responsible, 
but what about the companies that develop and commercialize (monetize) the technology enabling and facilitating such crimes?
Should Tech be held accountable for the foreseeable 
misuse of  their products?
What does this mean in terms of  development responsibility for 
algorithms and applications?
To what extent should Tech be held accountable for war crimes 
or crimes against humanity if  their technology abets incitement to genocide?
Should we include advertisers and other funders in the ambit?  
Should we, the users, be held responsible for not flagging patents lawlessness? Is there a moral obligation to discontinue the use of  reprehensible technology - in other words a moral boycott obligation ? These are some of  the pressing questions we need to address urgently .   The net was and tech have enjoyed unrestrained celebration for the last 25 years. Unfortunately had the above questions been raised at the inception of  our current tech revolution the world would most probably have been a much safer and egalitarian place.It is not too late however, but the conversation can no longer be put off.
Due to the net's unique combination of  
scale and third-party use nefarious content involves at least a triangle: The author, the infrastructure provider and the victim. As mentioned above we could also include advertisers, government and users (not exhaustive list).
Infrastructure providers may be divided 
into platforms, telecommunications operators and infrastructure owners. Search and bespoke applications may be included in this category for the purposes of  addressing the questions raised.
For each actor specific accountability 
standards need to be developed.
In addition, accountability as such 
should also be broken down into moral, civil and penal liability where different intentional elements apply .
One the most important and challenging 
problems facing net and tech accountability is that of  complicity .When are the different parties in the triangle complicit in the crime  originally committed by the author/perpetrator?
Complicity may be willful and thus 
associate the accomplice with the nefarious objective sought by the perpetrator or it may be knowledge of  the crime,  willful ignorance,  recklessness or negligence in terms of  the use made of  the means put at the disposal of  the perpetrator (for instance a call for violence or harassment made on social media).
Finally third party accountability 
(complicity) may be based on a duty of  care.
When confronted with demands for 
accountability T ech typically respond with two lines of arguments which are deemed to justify immunity .
The first line of  argument is what we may 
call the “quantity argument”, it goes like this: We cannot be held accountable for what our users post and how they utilize our technology . There are simply too many users and too much content for us to be able to follow let alone properly analyse 
Should T ech be held 
accountable for the foreseeable misuse of their products ?EXPERT PIECES
Should Tech be Held 
Accountable for the Forseeable Misuse97and block (if  necessary).
This argument is then combined with the second « justification » 
which is the protection of  free speech:
Tech taken it upon itself  to evangelize unrestrained speech to 
the extent of  even - almost -proclaiming that they are not in the 
business of  making money , but bringing speech to oppressed 
peoples around the world allowing them to attain the highest level 
of  human fulfilment and societal nirvana ( in the shape of  course 
of  western democratic ideals which in Tech's self  erected role of  
crusaders of  « good » just happens to coincide with their insatiable 
business model based on big data and absence of  compliance cost 
and legal consequences).
A closer analysis of  these “justifications” will however expose the 
inherently falacious reasoning: First of  all artificial intelligence can  
already achieve astound success in proactively intercepting  hurtful 
content and not only block it before it reaches dissemination and 
virality , but also identify accounts (if  not authors themselves) which 
repeatedly generate such content and which could easily be closed 
down.
In addition the quantity argues is essentially flawed because success 
can never justify harm!Imagine if  it was the drug industry . There would be a public outcry 
in case toxic drugs was sold by any manufacturer who in its defense 
would argue that its quality control system could not keep up with 
the enormous demand.
Success could never justify harm.
As far as the second one of  argument is concerned ("The Knights 
of  Free Speech") Tech has been very successful in manipulating 
public opinion by spinning a narrative that free speech necessarily 
means that they should be shielded against accountability by strong 
immunity laws.
Clearly this is but mythology void of  any intrinsic truth: 
Free Speech has become the one single  human right is 
must often trampled upon in order to attain political or 
economic control.
Free Speech was never meant to allow incitement, defamation and 
manipulation.
Free speech deserves better than Tech’s self  anointed messianic role.
It is one of  our most critical foundational human rights and Tech’s 
dilution of  it is shameful.
The  time has come for the international community to develop a 
comprehensive standard of  accountability which will allow us all to 
reap the benefits of  the empowerment and inclusiveness promised 
by Tech at its nascency .
 How can the dogma of  Free Speech ever justify doing harm 
with “actual knowledge”. Time and again do we see the Tech 
Titans acquire actual knowledge of  toxic content (either because 
they intercept it themselves or because it is flagged by users or 
governments), but they rarely take appropriate action.
They even often decide not to take it down, arguing that they 
are not the judge and in any case  immune to such obligations 
(thereby invoking especially shield under US law – the infamous 
Communications Decency Act section 230 C).
It is intolerable that anybody – whether “immune” or not – 
should be allowed to continue to cause harm when acquiring 
actual knowledge simply by referring to some sort of law which 
from a technical point of view may shield them against civil or 
criminal action.
Actual knowledge amounts to an intention to associate yourself  
with the crime if  action against it may be easily taken - yet not 
taken.  Former Chief T echnology Officer,
UNESCO MGIEPLearning W orkflow 
Reimagined: AI-powered 
Learning Solution Approach 
ROY  SAURABH
EXPERT
PIECES
Challenges in global K-12 Education 
ecosystem 
Lack of Quality T eachers
The ‘Economic Policy Institute’ (epi.org) recently came out with 
its first report in ‘The Perfect Storm in the Teacher Labor Market’ 
series that highlights the gravity of  the problem of  Teacher 
shortage affirmed by all available qualitative as well as qualitative 
indicators.[1] In the age, when lack of  qualified and well-
trained teachers in both Global-South as well as Global 
North geographies is acknowledged and reported, EXPERT PIECES
This paper explores the current challenges in current K12 
education systems globally that covers problems like dearth 
of quality teachers or sharing of best practices across 
contexts of language, culture or geography. The solution 
approach suggests leveraging already information rich 
internet for credible web resources that are qualitatively and 
complexity parsed & vetted leveraging AI (semantic analysis) 
and combining established link-analysis quality judgments 
with text-based judgments. Ontology-based User and 
Subject domain models are leveraged in the backend 
to create common knowledge sharing protocols and 
annotating various concepts to cluster related knowledge 
repositories. Further work may be required to study the 
societal impact of such a radical solution approach potential 
implementation and key considerations around end users 
especially minor learners’ data privacy & ownership issues.AbstractEXPERT PIECES
99search for alternatives with each 
passing generation of  learners can’t be delayed any further . There is overwhelming evidence confirming the high cost of  Low-Performing Teachers even if  measured in very basic economic terms of  dollars in lost income and productivity each year that ‘low-performing’ teachers remain in the classroom. [2]
Lack of access to Knowledge 
repositories 
The problem is further complicated 
by the knowledge repositories’ silos that are still rampant globally and these silos range from language, geographical, cultural or sometimes even intentional blockades created by unwilling subject matter experts through content copyrights or technological safeguards. The position this paper takes is concerning the knowledge sharing of  content that has recorded explicit creators’, publishers’ or distributors’ consent to share rather than concerning with protected content by intentionally created anti-sharing safeguards laid out for commercial, content sensitivity or any other thematic reasoning. 
Lack of common knowledge sharing 
protocols
Many times, the problem arises due to 
differences in knowledge corpus of  words arising due to contextual differences. This leads to learnings from one context not being mapped to the problem scenarios from other context in the absence of  common understanding of  concepts across contexts. Following web protocols (http(s)) analogy , universally accepted protocols are needed to be derived and agreed upon to be able to draw meaning across contexts between course creators. Further a shared taxonomy or ontology regarding the knowledge domains is also of  essence to pool related topics together across contexts.Lack of quality , age-appropriateness scoring of web resources
Even though technology and modern 
search engines have made content discovery and searchability extremely easy in today’s age, the sheer volume of  web resources that are made available without much regard to quality , credibility , content semantic relationships and age-appropriateness creates new problems especially in the realm of  education and learning. In the era of  fake news rocking the world of  geopolitical systems, the threat of  link/text spamming, cloaking, quality evaluation inadequacy [3] is extremely potent demanding further research in rethinking content discovery mechanisms that are better suited to the educational ecosystem.
Proposed Solution Approach for Current Global K-12 Education Ecosystem 
The above challenges require a radical new approach to how we approach education and learning in general. Through various global interactions with various socio-economic background learners, the new ‘Learning Process’ could comprise of  the below components:
Content DiscoveryIn an information overload era when there 
is no dearth of  information and this year we are already on track to create 1.7MB of  data every second for every person on earth [4], the need is to make sense of  the information in a meaningful dynamic way for learners to feel empowered to learn by creating courses. Technology , AI in particular, can help learners discover meaningful information through making connections that current search engines don’t seem to be making. For example, current search result is heavily reliant on evaluating the anchor text quality that annotate hypertext link in their scoring function [Craswell et al, 2001] which is easy to 
manipulate by spammers. The alternate to this approach could be to combine established link-analysis quality judgments with text-based judgments. Further, collaborator’s reputation indexing and immutability of  information custody chain could be considered to counter problems related to link exchange programs [3] that are currently rampant where web page authors agree to reciprocally link in order to improve their rankings. Also, through ‘Human in the Loop’ approach user feedback can help distinguish links included primarily for business or manipulative purposes from those included primarily for editorial purposes. 
Content Complexity Assessing the complexity of  the knowledge concepts is of  importance for learning resources indexing, to provide useful 
recommendations and helping define the learning path for learner’s topic of  interest. Higher-order concept is defined as a more abstract concept that has multiple inheritance relations exist between classes and allow to structure the concepts they express in terms of  orders of  abstraction.  [5] An ontology (or knowledge graph) is a powerful model to represent concepts and their relationships in a standardized manner. With the growth of  research in the semantic web, cross-domain description of  the world became available, and one of  the most known is DBpedia that is a crowd-sourced project to provide an open knowledge graph based on the information available in several Wikimedia projects. It provides thus the description in a structured and linked way of  various concepts (e.g.: persons, places, organizations, etc.). The solution approach recommends leveraging DBpedia and its ontologies to capture conceptual entities from a text (we leverage Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) for topic modelling), build a concept graph that includes entities and their higher-order concepts, and transforms the graph into a vector of  features. Thus, the solution approach proposes complexity scoring of  each concept leveraging models that go beyond current syntactical & lexical features, and are based on the text’s semantic 
T echnology , AI in particular, can help 
learners discover meaningful information through making connections that current search engines don’t seem to be making.EXPERT PIECESEXPERT PIECES
Content Discovery
Arranging Content 
BlocksComplexity ParsingAssessments/
Certifications/
Feedbacks
101analysis, that gets tagged in content 
discovery panel with each extracted concept. 
Content Blocks rearrangementThe next critical step in the 
proposed learning process is the ability of  arranging various discovered content blocks, labeled with respective complexity scores, in an order that makes sense to the individual learners. The solution approach helps provide each learner an individualized learning experience that accommodates learners of  different abilities, initial knowledge level, and learning styles. With traditional teaching styles in the traditional classroom, such individualized attention is often not possible. In contrast to the linear learning models where all learners follow a rigid path, nonlinear or non-sequential learning designs shift the responsibility for mastering a particular subject to the learner. The transformed role of  teachers may involve providing guidance to the learner and determines the level of  competency . However, the learner is responsible for mastering the subject through a self-determined path and rate. Such a learner-centered pedagogy will ultimately be more effective than the instructor-centered pedagogy [6].   Design of  proposed nonlinear learning environment should enable learners to select any entry point in the subject and directly move to any other point in the subject at will. Ideally , learning is individualised because each learner designs their own learning path and learning speed by the choices the learner makes. Knowledge concepts are divided into blocks instead of  sequential pages. The information blocks could be connected in a coherent manner so that ancillary information that is necessary for learning (definition, images, audio, video, etc.) can be accessed directly . This design should be able to accommodate linear and nonlinear learning styles, novice to advanced learners, and a path and pace set by the learner – not as predetermined by the instructor. [7]
Acknowledgement - Feedback/
Assessment/Certification
Final step in proposed learning 
process is the learner’s need to receive feedback, share the learning progress or to get assessed and certified. The solution approach proposes continuous student assessment over standardized high-pressure assessments. The Learner evaluation could leverage the semantic analysis. Checking mistakes is not enough to assess the writing skills of  a learner; one also needs to measure the ability to express more complex thoughts, with the use of  precise concepts [8]. The complexity assessment is text simplification, a process that aims at providing a simpler version of  a text by reducing its complexity , without removing its substantial content [9]. As a formative tool, continuous student assessment informs feedback, remediation, and/or enrichment targeted to a student, a group of  students, or a whole class.  It may also help to identify the need for specific professional development objectives for a teacher or group of  teachers and inspire related steps. [10]
Key considerations
There are few considerations that require further deliberations, research and monitoring to ensure that the proposed solution indeed holds true to the promise the approach holds while fixing current education system blind spots.
Removing Power HierarchiesThe proposed solution approach if  
implemented in mainstream education systems, would definitely change the hierarchies between students and teachers. In the proposed approach, Learning by Teaching takes a step further in increasing fluidity in the conventional role definitions of  teachers & students. The effects of  a change like this needs to be explored further on societal and learning levels as this kind of  hierarchical construct instilled a sense of  implicit trust between parents & teachers. So while the proposed solution approach empowers learners, the same could dilute interpersonal relationships that in-person interactions offers in the current era.
Societal AcknowledgementOne of  the key goals of  education, at 
least in the current educational paradigm, is the acknowledgement of  education assessments/accomplishments by Higher Educational Institutes, prospective Employers, Member State Governments’ immigration policies, etc. Without parallelly getting acknowledgments from such key stakeholders that view educational assessments as an indicator of  individual capability , the new flipped approach could remain in the fringes instead of  ever becoming part of  mainstream K-12 education ecosystems.Governance Structure
Finally , the proposed solution approach 
could fail or get riddled with familiar flaws very soon, if  proper governance controls are not embedded in the solution architecture and solution design.  Key solution design considerations that provide proper auditability of  the AI models & related Datasets and explainability behind each AI production ready models that serves consequential decisions is paramount. Questions regarding Data privacy and Data ownership need to be continuously asked and irrespective of  the Governance authority , the solution design should ensure that the Digital platform that follows the suggested approach implements Human Rights by Design itself. United Nations, UNESCO in particular, could play a pivotal role in implementing such a solution and ensure that the changes are brought into effect from top policy levels to bottom field levels. EXPERT PIECES
[1] ‘The teacher shortage is real, large and growing, and worse than 
we thought’ Report • Emma García and Elaine Weiss • March 26, 2019[2] Commentary on Raj Chetty , John N. Friedman and Jonah E. Rockoff, "Great Teaching:Measuring its effects on students’ future earnings” Education Next, Summer 2012 / Vol. 12, NO. 3[3] ‘Challenges in Web Search Engines’ - Monika R. Henzinger, Rajeev Motwani*, Craig Silverstein[4] 6th edition of  the ‘Data Never Sleeps’ report[5] Rémi Venant, Mathieu d’Aquin. Towards the Prediction ofSemantic Complexity Based on Concept Graphs. 12th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM 2019), Jul 2019, Montreal, Canada. pp.188-197. Ffhal-02315319f[6] Felder, Richard & Brent, Rebecca. (2005). Understanding Student Differences. Journal of  Engineering Education. 94. 10.1002/j.2168-9830.2005.tb00829.x. [7] Robberecht, Ronald. (2007). Interactive Nonlinear Learning Environments. The Electronic Journal of  e-Learning. 5. [8] B. Kopainsky , P . P . Dummer, and S. M. Alessi. Automatedassessment of  learners’ understanding in complex dynamic systems.System Dynamics Review, 28(2):131–156, Apr. 2012.[9] S. Narayan and C. Gardent. Hybrid simplification using deepsemantics and machine translation. In Proceedings of  the 52nd Annual Meeting of  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 435–445, 2014.[10] Muskin, Joshua A. and Oficina Internacional de Educación.“Continuous Assessment for Improved Teaching and Learning : ACritical Review to Inform Policy and Practice.” (2017).
REFERENCES
EXPERT PIECESScaling Social Emotional 
and Ethical Learning to Meet Global Challenges: Compassionate Integrity Training Moves to the Internet
SHANE O'CONNOR
EXPERT
PIECES
What is CIT?
Compassionate Integrity Training (CIT) is a multi-part training 
program that cultivates basic human values as skills for the purpose of increasing individual, social and environmental flourishing. By covering a range of  skills from self-regulation and self-compassion to compassion for others and engagement with complex systems, CIT focuses on and builds towards compassionate integrity: the ability to live one’s life in accordance with one’s values with a recognition of  common humanity , our basic orientation to kindness, and reciprocity . Unlike some definitions of  integrity that focus on mere consistency with one’s values, without examining what those values are, compassionate integrity insists that consistency with one’s values is not enough if  those values promote harm to oneself, others, or the world. Instead, maintaining and increasing consistency with one’s values is most beneficial when they are values that promote one’s own well-being as well as that of  others. As to what those values are and how we understand 
Compassionate Integrity Training (CIT) is a 
multi-part training program that cultivates basic human values as skills for the purpose of increasing individual, social and environmental flourishing. them, this is arrived at by investigating 
and examining things for oneself, using common sense, common experience, and science. Compassionate integrity is, therefore, not something achieved merely as a result of  wishful thinking or force of  will, but rather as the result of  building up knowledge, understanding, and a set of  concrete skills. Because compassionate integrity is what guards against actions that compromise the well-being of  oneself  and others, cultivating it in one’s life and in one’s community directly impacts individual and collective flourishing.CIT is based on cutting-edge developments in the fields of  neuroscience, psychology , trauma-informed care, peace and conflict studies, and contemplative science, and builds off of  work done by Daniel Goleman (author of  the book Emotional Intelligence) and Peter Senge, initiatives in Social and Emotional Learning (SEL), and other areas. Its development has been aided by the collaborative work of  a team of  experts with both academic and applied backgrounds in these areas. CIT begins with the foundational concepts that set the stage for the entire program, and then moves through a series of  10 modules, each focusing on a particular skill. These modules are organized into three series, each corresponding to a domain.
Series I: Self-Cultivation
1. Calming Body and Mind2. Ethical Mindfulness3. Emotional Awareness4. Self-Compassion
Series II: Relating to Others
5. Impartiality and Common Humanity6. Forgiveness and Gratitude7. Empathic Concern8. Compassion
Series III: Engaging in Systems
9. Appreciating Interdependence10. Engaging with Discernment
Current ImplementationsT o date, CIT has been implemented 
for participants in over thirty countries through a network of  over fifty facilitators based in fourteen countries. These facilitators deliver CIT 
both in-person and online. A traditional course takes place over ten weeks, with one skill taught per week for two hours. Between sessions participants are encouraged to read the CIT Participant Manual, listen to podcasts, follow guided audio practices, and complete contemplative journaling questions, all specific to each skill. Online courses are essentially delivered in the same way , but rather than gathering in person every week, participants gather online via video teleconference. Most recently , we have also developed hybrid options of  some skills being delivered online followed by some in person facilitated sessions.
Through these two modalities, CIT 
has been implemented for a wide variety of  populations, including civic leaders, educators, individuals experiencing homelessness and substance addiction, incarcerated persons, university students, social justice workers, youth leaders and EXPERT PIECES
Versatile facilitator, trainer and educator
103the general public, particularly through our partnership 
with the Charter for Compassion. While the impact of  the 
program has been positive as measured by self-report, qualitative 
surveys, as well as early self-report quantitative measures for social, 
emotional and physical well-being, growth is limited by the number 
of  facilitators who are currently certified and the limitations on 
training and certifying new facilitators. As a young program, there 
are only so many individuals qualified to lead facilitator training 
courses, although there is increasing demand. This limitation will 
necessarily diminish the impact of  the program as it will limit the 
number of  individuals who can be reached by CIT . Although 
we have been contemplating how to scale the program since its 
inception, the recent alliance with UNESCO’s Mahatma Gandhi 
Institute of  Education for Peace and Sustainable Development has 
brought this challenge to the forefront. As such, we have begun 
creating a fully self-directed, online version of  CIT , code named 
Lucy .
Challenges and Opportunities of Lucy: Can AI Be the Solution?
Many portions of  Compassionate Integrity Training port 
easily to a self-directed platform. Content traditionally 
delivered by lecture, text, and writing or audio practice 
can easily be ported directly to an online platform or 
transferred to video or recorded audio. Some critical 
elements of  CIT , however, do not so easily transfer to an online 
environment. Two critical components of  CIT , as currently 
delivered, are Mindful Dialogues and Accountability Partners. 
Mindful Dialogues are opportunities during each session for 
participants to pair with each other to discuss the skill they are 
learning in that session based on a series of  guiding questions. 
In today’s hectic world, filled with increasing distractions, people 
rarely take the time to engage in meaningful, uninterrupted 
conversations. The best conversations allow us to connect deeply 
with others around subjects that matter, helping us explore our 
thoughts, feelings and emotions in a safe space while being present 
for another to do the same. Because these opportunities are so rare, 
yet so important, Mindful Dialogues can be a vital component 
of  Compassionate Integrity Training, even if  they only last ten 
minutes. These dialogues are easy to facilitate in person and can 
even be done effectively online via videoconferencing technology . 
Finding ways to replicate these dialogues and their effects in a self-
directed course is a challenge for which we have yet to come to a 
satisfactory conclusion. In some instances, Lucy will be offered in cohorts who will all be taking the course at the same time. Perhaps 
there are ways to pair individuals up during the course for purposes 
of  Mindful Dialogues? In rare cases, people in Mindful Dialogue 
dyads do not do well together. In smaller in person or online 
courses, facilitators can help participants find a new partner. With 
Lucy , however, there could be thousands of  individuals in a cohort, 
and managing any issues that arise in these dialogues could be 
prohibitive. As a resiliency-informed program, we are particularly 
sensitive to not placing participants into a situation where they 
could feel threatened or unsafe. This sensitivity makes organizing 
these dyads even more precarious. Could artificial intelligence 
provide a solution to this challenge? Mindful Dialogues are 
designed for participants to voice their thoughts and emotions in 
an environment where the listener does not hijack the conversation. 
We instruct listeners to not ask questions or give advice. They are 
simply to listen with engagement and interest. Given this design, 
would artificial intelligence be capable of  being in dialogue with 
a participant in a way where the participant could vocalize their 
thoughts and feel as if  “someone” was listening to them and 
validating them?
We face a similar challenge with Accountability Partners. The 
dyads formed during Mindful Dialogues are used for creating 
peer accountability within CIT . Ongoing, regular practice 
is an important component of  CIT , and having a system of  
accountability for these practices helps ensure the success of  the 
program. We currently do this within CIT by asking participants 
to complete a reflective written self-assessment after each session 
and to check in with their Mindful Dialogue partners a few times 
between sessions to share these reflections and see how they are 
doing with the practices. This check-in is another opportunity for 
peers to encourage one another to practice CIT daily or as often 
as possible in order to allow the content to sink in and affect their 
mental and behavioral habits. Like Mindful Dialogues, we have 
yet to determine the best way to encourage this same level of  
accountability and connection in an SDL version. Again, we are 
exploring whether AI is a reasonable solution to this challenge.
In partnership with UNESCO MGIEP , we are hoping to answer 
these important questions. Partnerships with organizations like 
UNESCO MGIEP and the Charter for Compassion are vital to 
continuing to cultivate a world that builds on our innate capacity 
for kindness, compassion and integrity . Together, with UNESCO 
MGIEP along with their networks and partnerships, we will build 
the capacity to reach out to young people throughout the globe, 
exploring how CIT can be utilized within areas like the prevention 
of  violent extremism, alternative means of  challenging and 
preventing substance abuse, directly engaging with key issues of  
global citizenship, sustainable development and, of  course, mental 
health and resilience. The question remains, how can artificial 
intelligence make these aspirations all the more possible. Many portions of Compassionate Integrity 
Training port easily to a self-directed 
platform. Content traditionally delivered by 
lecture, text, and writing or audio practice 
can easily be ported directly to an online 
platform or transferred to video or recorded 
audio. 
Chief Education Scientific Advisor
New Zealand Ministry of Education Transformative Pedagogies 
and SEL: The Challenges 
for Education and Digital 
Citizenship in Aotearoa 
New Zealand
STUART MCNAUGHTON
EXPERT
PIECES
UNESCO MGIEP’ s TECH 2019
10 – 12 DECEMBER, 2019 VISAKHAPATNAM, ANDHRA PRADESH
Two recent events in Aotearoa New Zealand have 
focussed a spotlight on educational policy and practices 
relating to cognitive and social and emotional  skills for 
citizenship in digital worlds. One, the immanent drop in 
immunisation status for measles following some parents 
rejection of scientific evidence, raises the challenge of 
building critical literacy. The second, a terrible terrorist 
attack raises the challenge of building critical literacy plus 
social and emotional skills. Despite knowing much about 
how to promote these skills in non-digital environments in 
schools, jurisdictions including Aotearoa New Zealand are 
not very effective. New digital tools, in the form of games 
and digital platforms provide possible ways of advancing 
schools’ effectiveness, and examples from Aotearoa New 
Zealand illustrate the potential. Three big challenges to 
developing these tools locally are identified: connecting 
with and building on cultural frameworks; scalability to 
embed in business as usual; and research and development 
infrastructure.AbstractEXPERT PIECESEXPERT PIECES
105Introduction
From time to time countries experience catalytic events 
that are wake up calls. Two recent events in Aotearoa New Zealand have focussed a spotlight on educational policy and practices relating to cognitive and social and emotional  skills. The skills are essential for our children’s and young people’s resilience, as citizens in digital worlds. 
Event 1: The measles outbreak in Aotearoa New ZealandA drop in full immunisation status for measles and the loss of  
herd immunity in some communities is immanent in Aotearoa New Zealand www.sciencemediacentre.co.nz/2019/09/03/aucklands-ongoing-measles-outbreak-expert-qa/. While access is an issue for some, there are increasing numbers of   parents who are hesitant to immunise (perhaps up to 6% of  parents), or who are  some staunchly anti-vaccination (1-3%) https://interactives.stuff.co.nz/2019/09/parent-trap-vaccination-measles-immunisation/
Not immunising when possible flies in the face of  the consensus 
of  scientific evidence and reflects an increasing vulnerability to misinformation. Social media will be major sources of  information for our children, the next generations of  parents ( see www.who.int/news-room/detail/28-08-2019-who-director-general-statement-on-the-role-of-social-media-platforms-in-health-information). And they are increasingly exposed to possible manipulation with misinformation, and untruths amplified through smart social-media platforms. 
Critical thinking with literacy Digital worlds create risks to citizenship as well as 
opportunities for citizens who can navigate around sources of  information confidently , and be able to engage critically with the knowledge and information that impinge on everyday lives (see www.pmcsa.org.nz/wp-content/uploads/18-04-06-Digital-Futures-and-Education.pdf). 
Countries can respond in three ways by :(1) legislating (eg restrict 
schooling to those vaccinated or with exemption); (2)  regulating (eg require social media platforms to limit results of  searches to those from internationally recognised health organisations); and (3) educating.We know a lot about how to promote these skills, (Abrami, Bernard, Borokhovski, Waddington, Wadwe, & Persson, 2015; Goldman, Braasch, Wiley , Graesser, & Brodowinska, 2011). In Aotearoa New Zealand there are enablers including the relatively open curriculum, and generally high levels of  reading literacy , which would allow innovation and impact. However, evidence from several countries indicates educational systems are not good at promoting these skills (McGrew, Ortega, Breakstone, Wineburg, 2017; National Literacy Trust, 2018), including innovative digital interventions in Aotearoa New Zealand (Jesson, McNaughton, Rosedale, Zhu &  Cockle, 2018). The evidence is that knowledge per se does not change this picture, but more skills in critical literacy do (Kahne, & Bowyer, 2018). 
There is an emerging technology of  serious games that 
can add to our pedagogies. Although most games have focused on knowledge acquisition (Boyle, Hainey , Connolly , Gray , Earp, Ott, Pereira, 2016) early examples of  games for more complex cognitive skills suggest possible effectiveness, given they share the features shown to be well-designed games. 
Games for critical thinking with literacyAn example from Aotearoa New Zealand uses these features, such 
as a highly motivating problem scenario (an imminent asteroid collision threat), and real world solutions for collaborative activity in immersive experiences. The quest element of  the game, means players search for information to solve the problem and they have to identify bias in the information they gather, the credibility of  sources and whether particular statements can be classed as “facts” or not. Initial testing has shown that the Astria educational game with teacher augmentation can support critical thinking, critical literacy , and technical vocabulary skills for both upper primary and lower secondary students (years 7-10). https://developingindigitalworlds.blogs.auckland.ac.nz/astria-countdown-to-impact/. 
Event 2: the Christchurch terrorist actThe second event was the terrible mass shootings by a terrorist on 
15 March 2019. It is hard to prevent acts of  violence coming from the outside. But a degree of  prevention and resilience is possible. 
Like the measles case it was followed by legislative responses 
(semi automatic weapons were banned and a buy back scheme instituted), and regulatory responses (proposals like those in the EU to hold social media accountable for promulgating hate speech). This event also underscored the educational need for critical literacy; for children to know how on line communities and media can manipulate stereotypes and prejudice.  But it added the further need to build social skills, with the Prime Minister asking for scientific advice about how to build social inclusion and empathy https://www.pmcsa.ac.nz/2019/05/31/pm-briefing-re-
Digital Citizenship
Critical LiteracySocial & Emotional SkillsKeywords
christchurch/. 
Again there are enablers. For more 
than a decade schools have had a mandate to promote such skills. The curriculum (New Zealand Ministry of  Education, 2007) identifies such attributes as “relating to others” and “contributing and participating” as valued key competencies. But it is left to individual 
schools to consider how they might promote the requisite skills such as perspective taking, empathy and being prosocial, as well as those of  self-control and self  regulation. It is expected that schools will do this in different ways (New Zealand Ministry of  Education, 2007, p.37).Fitzpatrick, Kenny , & Brandeau, 2015; Reid Chassiakos, Radesky , Christakis, et al., 2016). Users of  social media tend to have reduced capacity to judge the appropriateness of  their own behaviour and new vehicles for bullying are created (Aiken, 2016; Foody Samara Carlbring, 2015; Gardella, Fisher, & Teurbe-Tolon, A. R., 2017).
Digital technology can have positive effects 
in this domain too. The implementation of  digital tools in classrooms generally is associated with increased engagement (less distractibility , persistence, and independence) and increased agency or self-efficacy  (Karich, Burns,  & Maki, 2014; Zheng, Warschauer, Lin, & Chang, 2016). But consistently producing benefits for the needed range of  social and Not surprisingly , classroom observations show a low focus on these skills other than self  regulation. This is despite knowing a lot about how to promote these skills too and the need to embed them in everyday teaching in subject areas Durlak, Weisberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, & Shellinger, 2011). And despite a societal concern to do better because various national and international measures, which include bullying, indicate New Zealand is less successful than other jurisdictions in promoting the needed skills (Webber, 2019). 
Social and skills and Digital citizenshipDigital worlds add urgency to this 
need because social media increases threats to social and emotional development (Courage, Bakhtiar, EXPERT PIECESEXPERT PIECES
107emotional skills requires much more deliberateness at a whole 
school level with specific instructional designs for classrooms (Winters, Greene, & Costich, 2008). 
Digital platforms for social and cognitive skillsA cross country collaboration has been testing a digital 
platform for developing these citizenship skills in urban schools in Aotearoa / New Zealand serving indigenous (Māori) and Pacific Island families from low SES communities. The context has been a multi-site initiative that 
has one-to-one devices, and community-wide wireless capability , for digital use at school and in homes http://www.manaiakalani.org/home. 
Their combination of  school wide practices for digital citizenship 
with research informed digital pedagogy for academic learning is associated with increased achievement and also increased student ratings of  self-control (Jesson, McNaughton, Wilson, Zhu  &  Cockle, 2018). But despite this students are very aware of  difficulties in regulating use at home and also worried about negative impacts with social usage (McNaughton, Zhu, Rosedale, Teng, Jesson, & Oldheaver, (in press)).  Face to face and online mediation of  collaboration is part of  the pedagogy but there is little specific teaching for the social and emotional skills required, especially perspective taking and consideration of  others.
A digital platform, which provides an instructional tool, 
is being tested to increase social and emotional skills. The argumentation (critical reasoning) tool requires critical thinking skills as well as perspective taking and aspects of  cognitive and emotional empathy (Kuhn, 2005; Rapanta, Garcia-Mila, & Gilabert, 2013). In well-designed (but non digital) classroom communities, skills are generalizable across curriculum areas, from oral to written modes and from peer to peer (eg  Reznitskaya, Anderson,  McNurlen, Nguyen-Jahiel, Archodidou, & Kim, 2001; Kuhn, 2005 Rapanta, Garcia-Mila & Gilabert, 2013). 
As with critical literacy , low levels of  argumentation and weak skills 
generally have been reported across grade levels and disciplines (Litma & Greenleaf, 2017; Kuhn, 2005), largely attributed to the absence of  explicit instructional designs and deliberate socialisation.  
This was also the case with the schools in the digital initiative and testing with the tool showed students typically adopt a single perspective mostly trying to argue for that position rather than considering the merits of  other perspective(s) and/or weaknesses in their own perspective (Rosedale, McNaughton, Jesson, Zhu, & Oldehaver (2019).
A co-design process was used to develop the tool resulting in three 
versions with different content, in two formats for younger (aged 7 and 8 years) and older students (aged 9 years and above) (Rosedale et. al. 2019; https://developingindigitalworlds.blogs.auckland.ac.nz/tools/online-argumentation/). An authentic topic serves as a provocation, setting up a complex social, cultural or scientific problem. Testing with this tool shows higher order argumentation can be increased using the tool (McNaughton, Zhu, Rosedale, Oldehaver, Jesson, & Greenleaf, C. (in press)), and augmented by teachers (McNaughton, Rosedale, Jesson, Hoda, & Teng, 2018). However, while awareness and acknowledgement of  the others’ position can be boosted, students find it very difficult to identify weakness or flaws in their own reasoning. Combining ‘criticality’ with perspective taking is a major challenge. 
Three caveats to ‘waking up’Wake up calls are defining moments only if  we wake up. 
There are (at least) three considerations in developing critical literacy and social and emotional skills using digital tools in Aotearoa New Zealand. The first is explicit recognition of  and connection with cultural frameworks. The curriculum documents already do this. But a risk with digital technology is an undue focus on what it can do for individual agency and personalisation, without also an equally strong  emphasis on empathetic group relationships and collaboration with others. 
The second issue is not peculiar to digital interventions. All 
educational interventions suffer from issues in scalability and sustainability . How to embed evidence informed instructional designs with digital tools nationally is a major challenge for local implementation science. 
The third issue is the infrastructure needed to develop tools and 
designs. In Aotearoa New Zealand the funding for research and development in educational sciences generally , is very limited comparted with other areas of  science. EXPERT PIECES
Abrami, P .C., Bernard, R.M., Borokhovski, E., Waddington, D. I., 
Wadwe, C. A. & Persson, T . (2015). ‘Strategies for teaching students to think critically: a meta –analysis’. Review of  Educational Research, 85 (2), 275-314.Aiken, M. (2016). The Cyber Effect. London: John Murray .Boyle, E. A., Hainey , T ., Connolly , T . M., Gray , G., Earp, J. Ott, M. Pereira, J. (2016). ‘ An update to the systematic literature review of  empirical evidence of  the impacts and outcomes of  computer games and serious games’. Computers & Education, 94, 178-192, 2016.Courage, M.L., Bakhtiar, A., Fitzpatrick, C., Kenny , S. & Brandeau, K. (2015). ‘Growing up multitasking: the costs and benefits for cognitive development’. Developmental Review. 35, 5-14.Durlak, J. A., Weisberg, R. P . Dymnicki, A.B., Taylor, R.D, &Shellinger , K. B. (2011). ‘The Impact of  Enhancing Students’ Social and Emotional Learning: A Meta-Analysis of  School-Based Universal Interventions’. Child Development,  Volume 82, Number 1, Pages 405–432. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01564.xFoody M, Samara M, Carlbring P . ‘ A review of  cyberbullying andsuggestions for online psychological therapy’. Internet Interventions 2015; 2(3): 235-42. Gardella, J. H.,  Fisher, B. W .,  & Teurbe-Tolon, A. R. (2017). ‘ A systematic review and meta-analysis of  cyber-victimization andeducational outcomes for adolescents’. Review of  Educational Research, 87( 2), pp. 283–308. doi: 10.3102/0034654316689136Goldman, S. R., Braasch, J. L. G., Wiley , J.,  Graesser, A. C. & Brodowinska, K. (2011). ‘Comprehending and learning from Internet sources: Processing patterns of  better and poorer learners’. Reading Research Quarterly 47(4), 356-381.Jesson, R., McNaughton, S., Rosedale, N., Zhu T . &  Cockle, J.(2018). ‘ A mixed-methods study to identify effective practices in the teaching of  writing in a digital learning environment in low income schools’. Computers in Education, 119, 14-30. doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2017.12.005Jesson, J., McNaughton, S., Wilson, A., Zhu T . &  Cockle, J. (2018). ‘Improving Achievement Using Digital Pedagogy: Impact of  aResearch Practice Partnership in New Zealand’. Journal of  Research on Technology in Education, DOI:10.1080/15391523.2018.1436012;Kahne, J. & Bowyer, B. (2018). ‘Educating for Democracy in a Partisan Age: Confronting the Challenges of  Motivated Reasoning and Misinformation’. American Educational Research Journal, February 2017, Vol. 54, No. 1, pp. 3–34 DOI: 10.3102/0002831216679817Karich, A. C., Burns, M. K. & Maki, K. E. (2014). ‘Updated meta analysis of  learner control within educational technology’. Review ofEducational Research., 2014, 84 (3), 392-410. Kuhn, D. (2005). Education for thinking. Cambridge, MAass: HarvardUniversity Press.Litman, C., & Greenleaf, C. (2017). ‘ Argumentation tasks in secondary English language arts, history , and science: Variations in instructional focus and inquiry space’. Reading Research Quarterly , 53(1), 107–126.McGrew, S., Ortega, T ., Breakstone J. & Wineburg. S. (2017). ‘The Challenge that’s bigger than fake news. Civic reasoning in a social reasoning environment’. American Educator, Fall 2017. 4-9.McNaughton, S., Rosedale, N., Jesson, R. N., Hoda, R., & Teng, L. S. (2018). ‘How digital environments in schools might be used to boost social skills: Developing a conditional augmentationhypothesis’. Computers and Education. 126, 311-323. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2018.07.018McNaughton, S, Zhu, T , Rosedale, N., Oldehaver, J, Jesson, R., & Greenleaf, C. (in press). ‘Critical perspective taking: Promoting and assessing online written argumentation for dialogic focus’. Studia Paedagogica (special issue: Better Learning through Argumentation).McNaughton, S , Zhu, T ., Rosedale, N., Teng, L., Jesson, R. & Oldheaver, J. (in preparation). ‘In school and out of  school digital use and the development of  social and emotional skills’. Paper accepted for the annual conference of  the American Association for Research in Education, San Francisco, April 2020.National Literacy Trust (2018). Fake news and critical literacy . The final report of  the Commission on Fake News and the Teaching ofCritical Literacy in Schools.New Zealand Ministry of  Education (2007). The New Zealand Curriculum. Wellington: Learning Media Limited.Rapanta, C., Garcia-Mila, M., & Gilabert, S. (2013). ‘What is meant by argumentative competence? An integrative review of  methods of  analysis and assessment in education’. Review of  EducationalResearch, 83(4), 483-–520.Reid Chassiakos Y , Radesky J, Christakis D, et al., AAP COUNCILON COMMUNICATIONS AND MEDIA. ‘Children andAdolescents and Digital Media’. Pediatrics. 2016;138(5): e20162593.Reznitskaya, A., Anderson, R. C., McNurlen, B., Nguyen-Jahiel, K., Archodidou, A., & Kim, S. Y . (2001). Influence of  oral discussion on written argument. Discourse Processes, 32(2–3), 155–175.Rosedale, N., McNaughton, S., Jesson, R, Zhu, T . & Oldehaver,J. (2019) Online written argumentation: Internal dialogic features and classroom instruction. Chapter 15 (pp. 263-278). in Emmanuel Manalo, Yuri Uesaka, Ouhao Chen & Hiroaki Ayabe. (Eds.). (2019).What It Looks Like: Developing Diagram Use Competencies andPredispositions to Support Problem Solving, Communication, and Thinking. New York: RoutledgeWebber, A, (2019). What we know about wellbeing in the education system. Presentation to Ministry of  Education. Wellington. 27th September, 2019. Winters, F . I., Greene, J. A., & Costich, C. M. (2008). ‘Self-regulation of  learning within computer-based learning environments: A critical analysis’. Educational Psychology Review, 20(4), 429-444;Zheng, B., Warschauer, M., Lin, C-H. & Chang, C. (2016).’Learning in one-to-one laptop environments: a meta-analysis and research synthesis’.  Review of  Educational Research, 86(4), 1052-1084.
REFERENCESEXPERT PIECES
109Education today
Challenges, concerns and wishlist for the future.
Concerns
1. Rigid classroom syllabus - if  each kid is different, then whythe same syllabus for every kid?2. Lot of  rote writing.3. No use of  technology .4. What if  I am bored?5. Write, write but why?
Wishlist
1. Colorful classrooms2. Colorful boards3. Better use of  technology4. More water breaks5. Gamification and playful learningEducation - T oday's 
Challenges, Concerns and Wishlist for the Future 
Five young students ranging from ages 5-15 from the 
Little Angels Schools, Visakhapatnam City , were the Chief Guests at TECH 2019. The session, which was part of the opening day , was designed to elicit 
 
        honest and spont
aneous responses from the central 
stakeholders of education -the young, developing, creative minds, who will drive and chart the future of humanity .
Nandini Chatterjee Singh, who leads the Rethinking Learning 
Programme at UNESCO MGIEP , chatted with the students on what they thought was the purpose of  education, how education met their expectations and satisfied their needs, what their greatest concerns were about the present day education system and how the students would like to see education transform.
The children were spontaneous, bold and extremely articulate, and 
were not hesitant to declare that they wished their teachers were nicer and did not have biases in the classroom, that the class sessions did not exceed 20 minutes and most importantly that the sessions should be fun, playful and engaging. The students desperately requested for more hands on learning, more experiments, as well as learning content that was relevant and would have an application in their daily life. Some very insightful, thought provoking and mature comments that came out of  the discussion were: the need for education and particularly assessments to prepare students for life and not just for academics; and for education to endow students with skills that they could use in the future. 
The discussion was extremely humbling and demonstrated wisdom 
and thought far beyond what is attributed to children in that age group.  The biggest takeaway was the simple and honest view of  humanity - that of  being kind, collaborative and happy , which is apparent to a child, however, seems lost to an adult. It is perhaps our greatest loss as we progress from childhood to adulthood. 
Then, to design education for children, we should become children 
once again.
Concerns1. We need teachers to be more friendly so that we are notscared.2. Rigid seating in classroom decided by others.3. Too much writing and copying
Wishlist
1. Shorter duration of  the periods. 20 minutes.2. Teachers should be flexible, kind and soft3. Flexible seating for children4. More practicals and experiments5. Start school lateCHILDREN'S
PANEL
Rudrasai Mukkavilli
CLASS 5F , LITTLE ANGELS 
SCHOOL, VishakapatnamVaishnavi Mukkavilli, 
4TH E, LITTLE ANGELS 
SCHOOL,
Vishakapatnam
111SPONSORSKNOWLEDGE PARTNERS
EDTech PARTNERS
OUTREACH PARTNERS
mgiep.unesco.org/techSEL for Everyone
Explore UNESCO MGIEP's blog on 
Social and Emotional Learning (SEL), 
titled 'SEL for Everyone', in which we 
are changing the way people converse 
on SEL. SEL for Everyone aims to 
ignite ideas and invite conversations 
between individuals invested in the 
field of  SEL. 
Read views of  experts, educators, 
teachers, practitioners, students, 
learners and those invested in the field 
of  SEL. But don’t just read – interact, 
ask questions, share your views by 
leaving comments on the blogs that 
interest you. 
Don’t forget to hit like or support – if  the 
views of  the author align with yours!Read now:  
https://mgiep.unesco.org/sel-for-everyoneISSUE • 12
PANDEMIC COURSE
https://framerspace.com/course/pandemic