 1 
Disin formation , hate speech and  digital 
citizenship  COVID -19 Education Response webinar  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYNTHESIS  REPORT  
 
Context  
 
COVID -19 is not only one of the most significant  health cris es of our times, but is also an 
information crisis  taking place in a dynamic and constantly evolving  scientific environment with 
uncertainty on many fundamental issues . The information crisis is the result of the plethora of 
available information and the difficulty in differen tiating  true from false -or even fake - 
information , and identifying what content is in a grey and evolving s cientific zone . 
 
Rumours, fake news and conspiracy theories about COVID -19 are proliferating online. They 
threaten people’s health, discredit public action, delegitimize preventive measures, spark 
diplomatic tensions and provide background for a surge of s tigma, hate speech and hate crimes 
against various groups and nationalities believed to be associated with the coronavirus.  The 
coronavirus has indeed given rise to a pandemic of misinformation and disinformation further 
affecting the fabric of societies a lready fractured by the sanitary crisis and its dramatic economic, 
political and social consequences.   
  
In this context, education can play an important role in minimizing these risks and promoting 
values of solidarity and human rights by ensuring that y oung people, as well as their educators 
and parents, acquire core competencies of digital citizenship that build resilience to 
disinformation  and misinformation  and the exploitation of these by hate -mongers . Education 
COVID -19 Education Response Webinar   
The COVID -19 Pandemic of Disinformation  and Hate Speech : 
How  can Education and Digital C itizenship help ? 
 
Friday 5 June  2020  
DONGSEON KIM/ Shutterstock .com  
SUMMA
RY 
REPORY   2 
Disin formation , hate speech and  digital 
citizenship  COVID -19 Education Response webinar  
 can also help young people engage in t he online environment in a safe, sensitive, critical, ethical 
and accountable  way as well as encourage them to play a role in pioneering  educational 
initiatives  that contribute to promoting digital citizenship . 
 
Objective   
 
The webinar , part of the UNESCO COVID -19 Education Response webinar series,  aimed to : 
1.  Examine ongoi ng challenges of disinformation, misinformation  and hate speech  during 
the COVID -19 crisis ;  
2. Highlight possible educational responses that can help young people engage positively in 
the current online environment based on values promoted through global citizenship 
education.   
 
The webinar  findings  will feed into the preparation of  a Global Ministerial Conference on 
Addressing and Countering  Hate Speech through  Education  that UNESCO is planning together 
with the UN Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect.    
  
Key challenges   
 
'The C OVID -19 pandemic raises unprecedented challenges, placing extraordinary pressure on 
societies threatened by potentially devastating political, social and economic consequences, and 
generating a wave of hate speech and a pandemic of disinformation and conspirac y theories. 
This has important human rights implications, now and in the long -term, including on the right 
to education and the right to information and participation, which are core to UNESCO’s 
mandate '.  Vibeke Jensen, Director of the Division for Peace and Sustainable Development at 
UNESCO  
 
Trust is a key currency  – it needs to be generated in public life and maintained in digital space s.  
As people  are questioning the responsiveness of schools and hospitals during the pandemic, 
public trust in governmen t institutions is being undermined . People tend to trust information 
from sources they know (e.g. religious  institutions , political parties, ethnic groups) rather than 
experts.  This phenomenon has been amplified during COVID -19 as science is dynamic knowledge 
that has put into question the traditional role of experts as reference points.  
 
The proliferation of fake news online  during the pandemic has reinforced this by  discrediti ng 
public action and fuelling stigma , discrimination and hate speech . Junk news outlets , which  have 
existed for years, have woven the corona virus  into their existing reporting angles , for example , 
by blaming migrants  or other specific groups as the origin of the problem ( Computational 
Propaganda Research Project , Oxford Internet  Institute) . By producing divisive, inflammatory 
content, sometimes backed up by states, junk news outlets  have contributed to the pandemic 
of disinformation. Social media algorithms have enabled the wide dissemination of such junk 
news  by driving traffic to websites thus fostering  virtual ‘echo  chambers’ and increasing 
polarization within societies .  
  3 
Disin formation , hate speech and  digital 
citizenship  COVID -19 Education Response webinar  
 'In relation to education and media , one of the real problems with junk news outlets is that they 
frame themselves around being critical of mainstream discourse and try to appeal to people who 
think of themselves as highly media literate and critical consumers of media. So, junk news  is 
already wearing the clothes of people promoting critical media literacy skills. This is one of the 
real problems.' Jonathan Bright , Senior Research Fellow at the Oxford Internet Institute  
 
Devising  effective  counter -strategies  
 
'One of the crucial points made is to insist on science as dynamic knowledge which changes 
according to new discoveries and research. In order to define fake and true we need an 
approach that  is based on verification of data and is able to contextualise in formation. This is 
what education can give. It is important that children acquire their own methodology and are 
able to detect in an overloaded environment what is data -based and what is not.'   
Stefania Giannini , Assistant Director -General  for Education  at UNESCO  
 
Helping people navigate the sea of information and differentiate what is true from what is not 
is an essential step to  counter  disinformati on, misinformation  and hate speech . Education and 
digital citizenship can help  address ignorance  to counter both disinformation and 
misinformation . Misinformation is a label  given to false information that is not created or 
circulated with the intention of causing harm .  Disinformation  describes content deliberately 
created or circulated, with the knowledge it is not true, and with the intention to harm a person, 
social group, organi zation or society .  It is, however, frequently impossible to accurately pinpoint 
the intention behind untrue content, and it is also extremely complex to determin e what , 
objective ly speaking, constitutes  harm.   
 
Addressing a range of hate speech does not mean limiting or prohibiting freedom of speech. It 
means  keeping that range from escalating into something more dan gerous, particularly the 
incitement to discrimin ation, hostility and violence, which is prohibited under international law  
(UN Strategy and Action P lan against Hate Speech ). Therefore , in our response to disinformation 
and hate speech , we must ensure that freedom of expression, notably freedom of the press and 
freedom of information, which are crucial foundations of democracy, development and 
dialogue , and preconditions for protecting all other human rights, are upheld.  
 
Strategies to counter disinformation, misinformation and hate speech should consider : 
 
1. Fostering  access to verifiable  and reliable information which makes the right to f reedom 
of expression meaningful - by ensuring citizens’ rights to seek and receive information, 
fact-checking and monitoring information, providing adequate legislative and policy 
responses  that do not suppress legitimate freedom of expression , as well as working with 
producers and distributors of information to  prevent disinformation and hate speech  
online and  “curate ” content  where necessary .   
 
2. Educati ng young people to enable them to be active consumers , sharers and producers  
of information and become an informed and accountable  generation of digital citizens – 
by teaching  global citizenship , how to debate and share perspectives , develop ing 
empathy and other socio -emotional skills, acquiring  media and information literacy   4 
Disin formation , hate speech and  digital 
citizenship  COVID -19 Education Response webinar  
 (MIL) , as well as  raising awareness about their rights and responsibilities o n-line, 
including how to act when faced with hatred.  
 
'I think global citizenship education is essential and valuable and within that media literacy is 
very important to teach children how to sear ch for information and how to stand up for 
themselves. Many young people are passive online when they see hate speech because they are 
intimidated. We need to empower them not only with digital skills but with critical thinking and 
fact-checking skills.'  Victoria Ibiwoye , Youth Representative to the SDG -Education 2030 
Steering Group  
 
Global,  regional  and country -level  initiatives  
 
'One of the biggest things we are noticing is that people are more interested in popularity than 
factuality and would rather listen to a celebrity or influencer than a scientist or epidemiologist. 
In fact, people with the largest voice do not have the facts and those with the facts do not have 
the large voice. Our best bet is in converting every user into a fact -checker a nd a critical user.'  
Nelson Kwaje , Leader of #defyhatenow , Digital Media and Training teams  
 
Combat ing misinformation by making each user become an informed, active, critical and 
accountable user of information is at the heart of the  UN Verified  campaign,  which was launched 
in May 2020 . Partnering with a social mobilization organization called ‘Purpose’ , Verified  invites 
the global public to come together t o counter misinformation by signing  up to become ‘digital 
first responders’ and share verified UN content with their networks on the coronavirus crisis.  
The campaign relates to  information on both the global health crisis and the  ensuing socio -
economic cri sis and encourage s solidarity on the road to recovery by enlisting people to promote 
verified information .  
 
Civil society  and youth -led initiatives are being pioneered around the globe to counter 
misinformation and disinformation and engage in favour of r espect, solidarity and human rights . 
Such initiatives aim to help  children and young people  have access to pluralistic and verified  
information, feel their voices are heard and ensure that their  legitimate grievances lead to 
meaningful changes.  For example:  
 
• #defyhatenow seeks to support those voices in South Sudan, Cameroon and Ethiopia 
acting against conflict to go ‘viral’ within and outside the country in which they take 
action . Its Digital  Media and Training teams create a space for people to express their 
opinions online in a civil way and without spreading disinformation that can lead to 
violence.  Furthermore , #defyhatenow helps bring scattered communities together and 
into an online peace -building framework , and bridg es gaps of knowledge and awareness 
of social media mechanisms between those with access to technology and those without.  
 
• OneAfricanChild Foundation  is an NGO in Nigeria addressing inequality in education by 
supporting disadvantaged children  through global citizenship and peace education.  The 
organization is 100% youth -led, working with local young leaders to empower the 
community through humanitarian effor ts. It promotes digital citizenship through media  5 
Disin formation , hate speech and  digital 
citizenship  COVID -19 Education Response webinar  
 and information literacy  (MIL) training , and encourages young people to have a digital 
footprint  that aligns to human rights and sustainable development  and guides them how 
to act when faced with hate onlin e.  
 
Teachers and educators play a vital role in preparing youth to be thoughtful and active 
participants to foster democratic societies in the digital age.  The Teaching Channel’s Deep Dive 
on Educating for Democracy in the Digital Age  is an initiative in the United States which aims to 
revisit civic education tak ing into account the way young people engag e onlin e through 
interactive  and peer -based acts , where individuals exert their voice s and influence on issues of 
public concern. For example, the Digital Civics Toolkit  is a collection of resources for educat ors 
to support youth by exploring a range of civic opportunities and dilemmas via modules focused 
on Exploring Community Issues, Investigation, Dialogue, Voice, and Action.   
 
'Inequality is highlighted in that some young people , when they are at home and s eparated 
from the school support structure , have other structures to draw on , but others do not. One of 
the other big dimensions of inequality is access to technology and broadband . Schools can  give 
access to a variety of effective supports in relation to misinformation.'  
Joseph Kahne , Co-director of the Civic Engagement Research Group  (CERG ) at the University 
of California, Riverside  
 
Education  and digital  citizenship:  the way forward  
 
Digital citizenship starts with building an informed citizen ry. Education can help young people 
understand what they know and what they do not know, differentiate what is credible  and 
authoritative  from what is not, and why they are responding to messages in a particular way.    
Guy Berger, Director for Freedom of Expression and Media Development at UNESCO  
 
Digital citizenship and education have a key role to play in helping  young people navigate the 
current online environment  and be  more resilient to ideologies of hate  as well as becoming 
actors against (rather than targets of) hate -speech, disinformation and misinformation . When 
devising education and digital citizenship st rategies, the following considerations should be 
taken into account:  
 
• Addressing both the  consumers and suppliers of information  – by educating young 
people to be  fact-checkers and critical users  of information  (through MIL)  as well as 
developing policies and ecosystems that keep different actors  accountable , including  
search engines and social media platforms  whose attention -diverting algorithms often 
amplify hate speech, misinformation and disinformation ; 
 
• Developing a comprehensive competency fr amework for learners anchored in SDG 
target  4.7 that promotes  global citizenship,  mutual respect, participatory dialogue, 
critical thinking and a sense of agency  for learners  in the way they engage  online ; 
  6 
Disin formation , hate speech and  digital 
citizenship  COVID -19 Education Response webinar  
 • Ensuring that all schools, including those in disadvantaged areas, help bridge the digital 
divide by developing curriculum and policies that highlight digital citizenship as a priority 
as well as develop youth’s skills in daily school practice;  
 
• Building the capacities of  teachers and educators  to: 
o 'Meet young people where they are ' by helping them become aware of their own 
biases, understand the politic o-econom ic aspects  of communications, including 
how Internet companies operate, fact-check information, research opposing and 
diverse opinions ; 
o Engag e young people through social medi a on civic and societal issues to increase 
their interest ; 
o Encourage young people to pioneer initiatives in their schools and communities 
that counter disinformation and hate speech, as well as promote digital 
citizenship . 
For additional  information  
 
UN Verified Campaign  
 
https://www.shareverified.com/en  
 
Oxford Internet Institute  
 
https://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/   
 
UNESCO  
 
https://en.unesco.org/themes/gced  
 
https://en.unesco.org/themes/fostering -freedom -expression  
 
https://en.unesco.org/covid19  
 
https://en.unesco.org/MILCLICKS  
 
Country -level resources  
 
https://defyhatenow.org/  
 
https://learn.teachingchannel.com/ed4democracy  
 
https://www.civicsurvey.org/  
 
Digital Civics Toolkit  
 7 
Disin formation , hate speech and  digital 
citizenship  COVID -19 Education Response webinar   
 
Stay in touch  
COVID19taskforce@unesco.org  
https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse  
@UNESCO  
@UNESCO  
UNESCO's COVID -19 Education Response  
ED/PSD/GCP/2020/02