Integrating Action for 
Climate Empowerment into 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
A short guide for countriesIn partnership withEducation 
Sector
United Nations
(GXFDWLRQDO6FLHQWL¿FDQG
Cultural OrganizationThe Global Education 2030 Agenda
UNESCO, as the United Nations’ specialized agency for education, is entrusted to lead and coordinate the Education 2030 Agenda, which is part of a global movement to eradicate poverty through 17 Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. Education, essential to achieve all of these goals, has its own dedicated Goal 4, which aims to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. ” The Education 2030 Framework for Action provides guidance for the implementation of this ambitious goal and commitments. UNESCO Education Sector
Education is UNESCO’s top priority because it is a basic human right and the foundation on which to build peace and drive sustainable development. UNESCO is the United Nations’ specialized agency for education and the Education Sector provides global and regional leadership in education, strengthens national education systems and responds to contemporary global challenges through education with a special focus on gender equality and Africa.
Published in 2020 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 
07 SP , France
© UNESCO 2020The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.  
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not 
commit the Organization.
Cover photo: Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com
CLD 416.  ED-2020/WS/21 REV.1
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined Contributions“Education is crucial for climate action because it has the exceptional 
power to make evolve mindsets and behaviours in the long run.  
Because education can change minds, it can change the world. ”
Audrey Azoulay, Director-General, UNESCO
“The six elements of ACE – education, training, public awareness, 
public access to information, public participation and international 
cooperation on these – are essential for countries and communities to 
counter climate change and adapt to its impacts. ”
Patricia Espinosa, Executive Secretary, UN Climate Change
Why this guide?
In the framework of the 2020 review of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement, this 
guide aims to provide countries with advice on how to enhance ambition and address the six elements of  ‘Action for 
Climate Empowerment’ (ACE) – Education, Training, Public Awareness, Public Access to Information, Public Participation 
and International Cooperation – in their respective NDCs. 
In five simple questions and answers, it provides suggestions for elements that can be integrated into the NDCs in order 
to make ACE an integral part of countries’ climate responses. The guide also shows why ACE is key to achieve the goals of 
the Paris Agreement and its greenhouse gas emission targets.
Acknowledgements
This guide was developed by UNESCO in partnership with UN Climate Change, and with contributions from the United 
Nations Alliance on Climate Change Education, Training and Public Awareness, which brings together 13 UN Agencies.
Special thanks go to Miriam Tereick from UNESCO’s section of Education for Sustainable Development and to  
Adriana Valenzuela from the UN Climate Change’s Action for Climate Empowerment team for the overall coordination 
and drafting of the guidelines.
Two existing UN publications have informed parts of this guide:
• UNESCO/UNFCCC (2016): Action for Climate Empowerment: Guidelines for accelerating solutions through 
education, training and public awareness  
• UNDP (2019): Guide to Strengthening National Climate Plans by 2020 
Our further thanks go to Reuben Sessa, FAO; Tahmina Mahmud and Olga Strietska-Ilina ( ILO); Environment and Climate 
Change Team, OHCHR; Sam Barratt, UN Environment; Nataly Olofinskaya, UNDP; Amy Wickham, UNICEF; Angus Mackay, 
UNITAR; Philip Vaughter, United Nations University; Yamide Dagnet, NDC partnership; Johanna Arriagada, Chile; Roberta 
Ianna, Italy; and Marcia McKenzie, Sustainability and Education Policy Network (SEPN) for reviewing earlier versions of 
the document. We also thank the various colleagues at UNESCO and UN Climate Change who have provided input and 
support to the development of this guide.2
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined ContributionsList of acronyms
ACE   Action for Climate Empowerment
CCA   Climate change adaptation
CCM    Climate change mitigation
COP   Conference of the Parties
ESD  Education for Sustainable Development
GHG  Greenhouse gases
IGO  Intergovernmental Organization
IPCC   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LTS  Long-term Emissions Reduction Strategy
NAP   National Adaptation Plan
NGO  Non-governmental Organization
NDC   Nationally Determined Contribution
SDG   Sustainable Development Goal
TVET   Technical and vocational education and training
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNITAR  United Nations Institute for Training and Research
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change3
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined Contributions A short guide for countries1) What is Action for Climate 
Empowerment?
Action for Climate Empowerment (ACE) denotes work 
under Article 6 of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1992) and 
Article 12 of the Paris Agreement (2015) and their six 
elements: Climate Change Education, Training, Public 
Awareness, Public Access to Information, Public 
Participation, and International Cooperation on these 
issues.
Implementation of all six elements has increasingly 
been recognized as crucial in solving the complex 
challenges presented by climate change. This is also 
reflected in the Sustainable Development Goals (for 
example SDG targets 4.7 and 13.3) to which the ACE 
agenda is closely related. 
In line with the Doha work programme on Article 6 of 
the Convention (2012-2020), ACE shall be guided by the 
following principles: 
• a country-driven approach according to the 
national circumstances;
• gender and an intergenerational approach; 
• a phased approach integrating ACE into existing 
climate change policies, programmes and 
strategies;
• an interdisciplinary multi-sectoral, multi-
stakeholder and participatory approach;
• promotion of partnerships, networks and 
synergies; 
• the principles of sustainable development. 2) What is the procedure for NDC review?
The Paris Agreement requires Parties to communicate 
a Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) every five 
years, each time representing a progression from previous 
efforts and reflecting the maximum ambition that the 
country can put together on the basis of its capacity. 
By 2020, those countries that have already submitted 
an NDC with a time frame up to 2025 are requested 
to communicate a new NDC, and the countries with 
an NDC with a time frame up to 2030 are requested to 
communicate a new NDC or update their existing NDC.
The need to step up efforts has taken on renewed urgency 
in light of the 2018 IPCC special report on 1.5°C, which 
underscored the need to halve emissions by 2030. Therefore, 
the year 2020 offers countries the opportunity to assess 
whether their NDCs reflect their highest possible 
ambition and whether they could do more to contribute 
to collective efforts towards achieving the goals of the 
Paris Agreement. The NDC revision process is also a key 
opportunity for countries to integrate ACE through 
activities aimed at building political will, strengthening 
societal ownership and engaging youth, civil society, 
the private sector and other key stakeholders to build 
a whole-of-society consensus over enhanced NDC 
ambition. 
In general, countries are encouraged to improve their 
NDCs through a clear and inclusive process with high-
level buy-in; align their NDCs with the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs); and communicate their NDCs 
transparently. NDCs tend to be interdisciplinary in nature, 
requiring involvement from multiple different ministries 
and implementing agencies as well as participation and 
understanding of the civil society. For overall guidance on 
how to establish a multi-stakeholder NDC enhancement 
process, please refer to the UNDP “Guide to Strengthening 
National Climate Plans by 2020”. Table 1 • ACE elements - scope and objectives
Scope Objectives
Education Change habits in the long-term Foster a better understanding of, and 
ability to address  climate change and its 
effects Training Develop practical skills
Public Awareness Reach people of all ages and walks of life Promote community engagement, 
creativity and knowledge in finding 
climate change solutions Public Access to information Make information freely available
Public ParticipationInvolve all stakeholders in decision-
making  and implementation Engage all stakeholders in debate and 
partnership to respond collectively to 
climate changeInternational CooperationStrengthen cooperation, joint efforts  
and knowledge exchange
Source : UNESCO/UNFCCC 20164
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined Contributions3) Why integrate ACE into NDCs?
Activities regarding all six priority elements of ACE 
are essential, both for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation: ACE prepares individuals, decision makers, 
government entities, productive sectors and society 
at large for the challenges that climate change brings, 
and empowers them to act upon these:
 ØEducation enables people to understand the 
causes and consequences of climate change, to 
make informed decisions and to take appropriate 
actions to address it. 
 ØTraining provides the core technical and soft skills 
as well as advanced knowledge needed to support 
the transition to green economies and sustainable, 
inclusive climate-neutral and resilient societies. 
 ØSuccessful public awareness campaigns engage 
communities and individuals in the common effort needed to foster climate-friendly behaviour, 
sustainable lifestyles and implement national, 
regional, sectoral and international climate change 
policies. 
 ØPublic access to information strengthens 
connections between knowledge production, 
knowledge sharing and decision-making, and 
provides people with the tools they need to play 
an active role in addressing climate change.
 ØPublic participation ensures ownership by 
encouraging people to be more attentive 
to policy-making and participate in the 
implementation of climate policies.
 ØThese five elements can all be strengthened 
through international cooperation. Governments 
and organizations can support each other with 
resources, technical expertise, ideas and inspiration 
for developing climate action programmes.
Table 2  • Characteristics of each ACE element
Education  
Education seeks to achieve profound, long-term 
changes in understanding, particularly among 
young people. It involves developing educational 
curricula, training of trainers and teachers and 
adequate pedagogies. The results of a successful 
programme would ultimately be a population 
whose deep-seated appreciation of the climate 
challenge leads to greater national action and 
commitment. Public access to information 
Programmes to engage citizens and CSOs in 
addressing climate change can be improved by 
ensuring that information is freely available. This 
is crucial in order to develop and implement 
effective policies and to engage people actively in 
implementing these policies. Technologies such as 
databases and the internet facilitate the provision 
of climate information, data and statistics to all 
citizens.
Training
Training programmes seek to spread specific 
practical skills that can have an immediate practical 
application. Examples include the ability to gather 
and interpret climate data, conduct inventories of 
national emissions, and identify climate-friendly 
technologies. Training is about learning by doing – 
individuals, communities and organizations can all 
benefit from ongoing learning.Public participation 
By ensuring that people can participate effectively 
in climate change decision-making and implement 
climate mitigation and adaptation activities, 
governments should seek to integrate civil society 
perspectives and mobilize the general public. In 
some places, this will prompt profound changes 
to how political leaders and civil servants are 
accustomed to working and encourage people to 
be more attentive to policy-making. 
Public awareness 
Many governments and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), intergovernmental 
organizations and UN agencies have already 
launched major public awareness programmes. 
But there remains an enormous unmet need for 
more outreach. Creating a successful outreach 
programme that truly changes behaviour involves 
targeted and systematic communications. International cooperation 
International cooperation and exchange can play 
a major role in strengthening ACE efforts. Many 
governments and relevant stakeholders need 
access to expertise and financial and technical 
resources so they can develop their own climate 
change programmes. All countries can benefit 
from sharing success stories, exchanging personnel 
and strengthening institutional capacity.
Source : UNESCO/UNFCCC 2016
5
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined Contributions A short guide for countriesACE is a key cross-cutting instrument involving all 
levels of governance and all actors in the society 
in climate action and in support of all elements of 
mitigation and adaptation. It has the potential to 
provide the social and political will for action, in addition 
to the required scientific and technological knowhow. 
ACE commitments, as non-GHG targets, can help 
accelerate the achievement of the GHG-related 
targets, and should, therefore, be included in NDC 
target-setting in concrete and measurable ways.
4) What is the mandate? 
At COP24 in Katowice, Poland (2018), Parties recognized 
the importance of ACE in the Katowice Climate Package 
– the Paris Agreement Work Programme – which includes 
“Ways of enhancing the implementation of education, 
training, public awareness, public participation and public 
access to information so as to enhance actions under the 
Paris Agreement” . By this decision, Parties agreed: 
“to continue to promote the systematic 
integration of gender-sensitive and 
participatory education, training, public 
awareness, public participation, public access 
to information, and regional and international 
cooperation into all mitigation and adaptation 
activities implemented under the Convention, 
as well as under the Paris Agreement, as 
appropriate, including into the processes of 
designing and implementing their nationally 
determined contributions” (Decision 17/CMA.1, 
paragraph 5)
In order to raise ambition that addresses the Paris 
Agreement holistically, and to present an inclusive NDC, it 
is therefore crucial to integrate considerations of ACE into 
the NDC review process. 
5) How to integrate ACE into NDCs?
The first step to integrate ACE into an NDC in a holistic 
way is to commit – if this is not already the case – to 
developing a national ACE strategy and to integrating 
ACE into climate change and sectoral policy. For 
this, it is important that all ACE and NDC focal points 
and education stakeholders come together, arrange 
knowledge transfer and engage in regular exchanges and 
collaboration.ACE national strategy 
The ACE strategy should be developed and implemented 
through a multi-sectoral and multi-stakeholder 
participatory process. In order to ensure co-creation and 
ownership for all ACE measures from the beginning, it is 
important to:
 ØInvolve key stakeholders (relevant government 
Ministries, regional and local authorities, 
businesses, workers, education and training 
institutions, youth organizations, inter alia) in the 
policy design and implementation process to 
foster effective governance and coherent policy 
coordination;
 ØEncourage collaboration and information-sharing 
between Ministries of Education and Ministries of 
Environment as well as other Ministries concerned 
with climate change and media/communications. 
This includes involving the Ministry of Education in 
climate change mitigation (CCM) and adaptation 
(CCA) strategies; 
 ØLink the ACE Strategy to national development, 
education and sectoral strategies and priorities 
and integrate ACE into core interventions 
regarding climate change, including climate 
change laws, Long-term Emissions Reduction 
Strategies (LTS), National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) 
and climate financing; 
 ØIntegrate ACE into formal monitoring and 
reporting in relation to the NDC.
The ACE strategy and its implementation should respect, 
protect and fulfil human rights, particularly the rights to 
education, participation and access to information. They 
should be gender-responsive and pay specific attention 
to the needs and knowledge/skills of vulnerable and 
marginalized groups of the population, including 
women, children and youth, migrants, indigenous people, 
people with disabilities and elderly low-skilled individuals. 
It should also take into account the situation of workers 
in declining sectors as well as those most affected by the 
green transition (for example communities reliant on coal 
mining).
It is also recommended that the ACE strategy and 
its implementation be closely aligned with the 
implementation and follow-up/review mechanisms 
of the Sustainable Development Goals, the new 
global framework on Education for Sustainable 
Development “ESD for 2030”,  and the international 
frameworks on access to information and public 
participation.6
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined ContributionsObjectives and targets
Below is a list of objectives, as well as suggested targets, 
for each of the six elements of ACE, that can be adapted 
to the specific national/regional contexts and addressed 
in NDCs. It is recommended to integrate these into 
the core NDC components rather than place them in 
a separate section, as strategies/means to achieve the 
respective mitigation and adaptation commitments.
Education 
 ØPromote, facilitate, develop and implement 
formal, non-formal and informal climate 
education programmes that encourage 
climate-friendly behaviour, focusing on both 
mitigation and adaptation;
 ØInclude climate change at all levels and across 
disciplines in both school and higher education 
curricula, as well as in technical and vocational 
education and training (TVET) and adult 
education, addressing the entire population;
 ØDevelop pedagogical resources/material that 
take into account different knowledge systems, 
including indigenous knowledge, as well as 
local languages;  ØImplement quality pre-service and in-service 
teacher training focused on climate change. 
Examples of concrete targets:
We recommend that the above be integrated into 
the NDC with specific, simple and measurable 
targets. For example:
 ÊBy 2025, include climate learning into  
(a) national education policies, (b) curricula,  
(c) teacher education and (d) assessment, 
including cognitive as well as socio-emotional 
and behavioural learning objectives.
 ÊIntroduce an integral inter-disciplinary climate 
module into all higher education degrees. By 
2030, ensure that all university students have 
an opportunity to take this module before 
graduation.
 ÊDevelop an integral component on climate 
change mitigation and adaptation for all 
teacher training. By 2030, ensure that x% of 
teachers have completed this component.Guide on how to develop an ACE national strategy
For a detailed step-by-step guide on how to develop an ACE national strategy and action plan, please see the “ ACE: guidelines 
for accelerating solutions through education, training and public awareness ” developed by UNESCO and the UNFCCC 
Secretariat (2016).
Education, training and awareness-raising activities
Any education, training and awareness-raising activities promoted by an ACE commitment in the NDCs should be 
underpinned by the principles and ambitions of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD). 
Today, traditional education and training systems (both formal and non-formal), pedagogy and content require a major 
transformation to accommodate the massive and complex changes that have taken place in the world over the past century, 
and to target the three dimensions of learning: the cognitive, socio-emotional and behavioural dimension. ESD addresses 
not only learning content, but also learning outcomes, pedagogy and the learning environment. Through ESD, learners 
are empowered with the knowledge, skills (technical and soft), values and behaviour to achieve a sustainable, inclusive and 
greener future. (see: https://en.unesco.org/themes/education-sustainable-development)7
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined Contributions A short guide for countriesTraining 
 ØIdentify and anticipate current and future skills 
and training needs for the green transition, 
taking into account different population 
groups and ensuring equitable access;
 ØIntegrate and mainstream climate change 
learning into the curricula of institutions 
that provide formal training at all levels, 
including professional bodies, apprenticeship 
programmes and trade bodies; 
 ØDevelop training materials in accordance with 
national circumstances, sectoral approaches 
and the cultural context;
 ØCooperate in, promote, facilitate, develop and 
implement training programmes (including 
training of trainers) focused on climate change for 
groups with a key role, such as policy and decision 
makers, scientific, technical and managerial 
personnel in the public and private sectors, 
journalists, women, youth and community 
leaders at the local, national, subregional, regional, 
sectoral and international levels;
 ØFacilitate non-formal training through the 
engagement and participation of youth in local 
and national climate change events, and build 
the capacity of youth as future leaders.
Examples of concrete targets:
We recommend that the above be integrated into 
the NDC with specific, simple and measurable 
targets. For example:
 ÊBy 2025, ensure that x% of government 
employees at a) national and b) sub-national 
levels have received training on CCA and CCM.
 ÊTrain x% of municipalities on proper waste 
management and separation, energy efficiency, 
water management/efficiency, green 
infrastructure and other climate change related 
issues. 
 ÊOrganize x number of gender-balanced 
capacity-building workshops for youth 
organizations on skills for green jobs.
 ÊCollaborate with private sector partners to 
ensure that by 2030, x% of male and female 
employees in key sectors of the economy 
(e.g. utilities, energy, transportation, food and 
agriculture) are trained in CCM and CCA skills 
and measures specific to their area of work.Public Awareness
 ØCooperate in, promote, facilitate, develop 
and implement inclusive public awareness 
programmes on climate change and its effects 
at the local, regional and national levels as 
appropriate;
 ØCreate key messages that make it simple and 
fun for people to take climate action and 
develop and implement action campaigns to 
encourage people to do small, easy things that 
can lead to lasting change, such as reducing 
their personal water or electricity use;
 ØEncourage, by means of popular media, 
personal action and contributions to address 
climate change, support climate-friendly policies 
and foster behavioural changes, noting the 
important role that social media and digital 
platforms and strategies can play in this context;
 ØCollaborate with civil society and private sector 
partners to ensure wide dissemination of public 
awareness-raising activities and limit the spread 
of ‘fake news’ and disinformation campaigns;
 ØConduct surveys to establish a baseline of 
public awareness, which can serve as a basis for 
further work and support the monitoring of the 
impact of activities; 
 ØRecognize and engage youth as knowledge 
holders and support the participation of youth 
as agents of change and/or trainers in public 
awareness campaigns.
Examples of concrete targets:
We recommend that the above be integrated into 
the NDC with specific, simple and measurable 
targets. For example:
 ÊDevelop and roll-out a public awareness 
campaign, including through national 
broadcasting media, explaining the components 
of the country’s NDC and climate policy. 
 ÊUse advertising, social media and public 
events to advocate for behavioural changes 
to promote sustainable consumption, energy 
efficiency and other climate-friendly actions, 
while also outlining the economic advantages 
of such behavioural change. Where possible, 
collect sex-disaggregated data on the 
impact of these activities on individuals and 
communities.8
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined ContributionsPublic Access to Information 
 ØGuarantee public access to information and 
related data on good practices, climate change 
initiatives, policies and results of actions, so 
that the public can understand and respond to 
climate change. This effort should harness new 
information technologies, taking into account 
factors such as quality of Internet access, 
literacy, gender and language issues.
Examples of concrete targets:
We recommend that the above be integrated into 
the NDC with specific, simple and measurable 
targets. For example:
 ÊProvide comprehensive, accurate and 
accessible information related to climate 
change on a) national and b) sub-national 
government websites.
 ÊDevelop guidance supporting accurate 
reporting on climate change in news outlets.
 ÊDevelop effective regulations for transparency 
and full disclosure of information related to 
climate change by the private sector.
 ÊTranslate into appropriate languages and 
distribute popularized versions of key 
documents on climate change, including 
assessment reports and other reports by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Public Participation 
 ØFoster the participation of intergovernmental 
organizations (IGOs), regional and local 
authorities, non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) and community-based organizations, as 
well as the private and public sectors, in order 
to raise awareness and increase understanding 
of the causes and impacts of climate change, 
as well as solutions that lead to measurable 
outcomes; ØCreate and support open and accessible multi-
stakeholder platforms for public participation 
and dialogue engaging youth, civil society, 
academia and the private sector in order to 
reach whole-of-society consensus on climate 
action and NDC ambition;
 ØPromote social dialogue and inclusive public 
participation in addressing climate change 
and its effects and in developing adequate 
responses, by facilitating feedback, debate and 
partnership in climate change activities and 
in governance, noting the important role that 
social media platforms and strategies can play 
in this context;
 ØStrengthen the science, policy and society 
interface by encouraging the participation of 
citizens as co-producers of knowledge (citizen 
science).
Examples of concrete targets:
We recommend that the above be integrated into 
the NDC with specific, simple and measurable 
targets. For example:
 ÊOrganize x number of consultations (through 
public meetings, workshops, online surveys, 
etc.) with public, private, and civil society 
stakeholders, including youth organizations, to 
advise on the development of a national ACE 
Strategy and its implementation.
 ÊEstablish a multistakeholder advisory 
committee bringing together x number of 
government agencies, x non-governmental 
organizations, and x private sector 
representatives to be consulted on all major 
CCM and CCA measures, and to support the 
implementation of the national ACE strategy.
 ÊEstablish a gender-balanced citizen 
consultation council on climate change 
to ensure a forum for citizen participation 
(including with wide participation from the 
private sector, civil society organizations and 
academia) and create working groups for 
specific ACE, CCM and CCA sectorial reforms. 9
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined Contributions A short guide for countriesInternational Cooperation 
 ØFoster subregional, regional, sectoral and 
international cooperation in undertaking 
activities within the scope of ACE to enhance 
the collective ability of Parties and non-Party 
stakeholders to implement the Convention and 
the Paris Agreement;
 ØDocument and share knowledge between 
countries regarding experiences, lessons 
learned, good practices and challenges in the 
implementation of ACE and promote peer-
learning, so that Parties, IGOs and NGOs that 
have the resources to do so might effectively 
target their efforts at providing appropriate 
support;
 ØDevelop and encourage international 
exchange programmes between government 
professionals, teachers, students and 
researchers with respect to training on climate 
change.Examples of concrete targets:
We recommend that the above be integrated into 
the NDC with specific, simple and measurable 
targets. For example:
 ÊAppoint a national focal point for ACE to 
reinforce direct exchange and collaboration 
on ACE with other ACE national focal points 
around the world, as well as with UNFCCC, 
UNESCO, UNITAR and other UN agencies, 
and participate in annual ACE dialogues and 
training opportunities for ACE focal points.
 ÊUse existing mechanisms of collaboration to 
share good practices on all elements of ACE, for 
example during annual meetings of regional 
multilateral organizations.
 ÊOrganize a bilateral/multilateral annual 
exchange programme with x number of 
countries to exchange government officials 
working on ACE, CCA and CCM measures 
during a period of 6 months.
Public participation and public access to information activities
Public participation and public access to information activities promoted by an ACE commitment in the NDCs should be 
underpinned by the principles and ambitions of other international frameworks such as: 
• Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration
• Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in 
Environmental Matters
• Bali Guidelines adopted by the UNEP Governing Council as a tool to assist countries in filling gaps in national and 
sub-national legislation in order to facilitate broad access to information, public participation and access to justice in 
environmental matters
• Regional Agreement on Access to Information, Public Participation and Justice in Environmental Matters in Latin 
America and the Caribbean
How to nominate an ACE Focal Point
The UNFCCC National Focal Point is requested to send a letter to secretariat@unfccc.int with copy to ACE@unfccc.int 
indicating: name of the nominee, title, institution and contact details. Once the communication is received, the newly 
nominated National Focal Point for ACE will be added to the network of National Focal Points for ACE.
For more information about ACE Focal Points and their terms of reference, see UNESCO/UNFCCC (2016), page 7, box 1.10
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined ContributionsWay ahead
In support of countries to implement ACE in the 
framework of their NDCs, UNESCO and UN Climate 
Change, in collaboration with all members of the 
UN Alliance, will continue their work in support of 
Climate Change Education, Training, Public Awareness, 
Public Access to Information, Public Participation and 
International Cooperation, including with respect to the 
upcoming Climate Change Conferences and the future 
work programme on ACE, to be adopted at COP26 in 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.For any questions or comments regarding these guidelines 
please contact esd@unesco.org or ace@unfccc.int.International Cooperation activities
The members of the UN Alliance on Climate Change Education, Training and Public Awareness and the NDC partnership 
provide various online platforms, websites and networks to support countries to implement ACE.  
For example:
• UNFCCC website with information on ACE  and the NDC interim registry 
• NDC Partnership website 
• UNDP: Mission 1.5 –Global Platform for Public Participation, which provides a platform for citizens to learn about 
climate policy and vote on climate solutions they would like to see implemented in their country
• UNESCO Associated Schools Network and the UNITWIN/UNESCO Chairs Programme
• UNESCO Resource bank for educators on the SDGs
• UN CC: Learn platform: The One UN Climate Change Learning Platform11
Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment into Nationally Determined Contributions A short guide for countriesFurther reading
• ILO (2019): Skills for a greener future: A global view. Based on 32 country studies [chapter 3.1.5: The role of skill 
development measures in NDCs, pp. 67-69]
• ILO (2019): Policy brief: Skills for a greener future: Challenges and enabling factors to achieve a just transition
• UNDP (2019): Guide to Strengthening National Climate Plans by 2020 
• UNESCO (2013): Climate change in the classroom: UNESCO course for secondary teachers on climate change 
education for sustainable development
• UNESCO (2016): Getting climate-ready: a guide for schools on climate action
• UNESCO (2017): Education for Sustainable Development Goals: Learning Objectives
• UNESCO (2017): Greening technical and vocational education and training: a practical guide for institutions 
• UNESCO (2018): Getting the message across: reporting on climate change and sustainable development in Asia 
and the Pacific. A handbook for journalists 
• UNESCO (2019): Country progress on climate change education, training and public awareness: an analysis of 
country submissions under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
• UNESCO/UNFCCC (2016): Action for Climate Empowerment: Guidelines for accelerating solutions through 
education, training and public awareness
• UNICEF (2012): Climate Change and Environmental Education
• UNICEF (2012): Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction in the Education Sector. Resource Manual. 
• UNICEF (2019): Are climate change policies child-sensitive? A guide for action: summary
• UNICEF/Brookings Institute/Plan International (2019): Girls’ education in climate strategies: Opportunities for 
improved policy and enhanced action in Nationally Determined ContributionsSustainable 
Development
Goals
In the framework of the 2020 review of Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs) under the Paris Agreement, this guide aims to provide countries with 
advice on how to enhance ambition and address the six elements of ‘Action for 
Climate Empowerment’ (ACE) – Education, Training, Public Awareness, Public 
Access to Information, Public Participation and International Cooperation –  
in their respective NDCs. In five simple questions and answers, it provides 
suggestions for elements that can be integrated into the NDCs in order to make 
ACE an integral part of countries’ climate responses. The guide also shows why 
ACE is key to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement and its greenhouse gas 
emission targets.Integrating Action for Climate Empowerment 
into Nationally Determined Contributions 
A short guide for countriesIn partnership with