1 
 IFAP -2020/ COUNCIL .XI/Inf.4 
Paris, 3 August  2020  
Original: English  
 
 
 
 
Eleventh (11th) Session   
Intergovernmental Council  for the Information for All Programme  (IFAP)  
 
22, 23, 24, and 25  September 2020  
9 a.m. to 12 p.m. Paris time/GMT +2  
Held ONLINE  
 
Item 4 of the provisional agenda  
 
 
Report on IFAP activit ies of 2018 -2019  and 2020  
  
 
In accordance with 40 C/REP/25  of 3 September  2019  and 40 C/REP/25 Add.  
of 4 November 2019:  Reports on the  Implementation of the  
Information for All Programme (IFAP) (2018 -2019)  
 
I. Introduction  
1. In the biennium 2018 -2019, the Bureau of the Information for All Programme ( IFAP ), IFAP’s 
six working Groups, the 34 National IFAP Committees and Secretariat focused on 
achieving concrete results within the six strategic objectives of the Programme and 
contributing towards the Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 by:  
 
a. Mainstreaming knowledge soc iety policies in national development plans for 
sustainable development;  
 
b. Fostering information literate societies;  
 
c. Promoting and widening access to knowledge and information in the public domain 
through the organization, digitization, dissemination and  preservation of content 
and data;  
 
d. Raising awareness of ethical issues related to information;  
 
e. Enhancing opportunities for disadvantaged communities by providing access to 
information and knowledge;  
 
f. Reinforcing promotion and use of Multilingualism in Cyberspace.  
2 
 II. Implementation of the IFAP Strategic Plan 2017 -2021  
2. The IFAP Strategic Plan for the period 2017 -2021 addresses new emerging challenges 
within a five -year vision for IFAP taking the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) into 
account. Building on its intergovernmental strength, IFAP continued supporting Member 
States to foster knowledge societies for sustainable development and peace as per its new 
results framework that sets the modalit ies of action as follows:  
• Organize regional events to raise awareness among policy makers on IFAP priorities.  
• Participate in international fora that address the IFAP priorities and leverage foresight 
for inclusive knowledge societies.  
• Formulate recommend ations based on the insights gained from pilot projects towards 
innovative inclusive knowledge society policies.  
• Participate in drafting sets of indicators that monitor and report on global 
engagements towards knowledge societies.  
3. Member States in Africa (Mozambique and Zimbabwe) and Latin America and the 
Caribbean ( Eastern and Western Caribbean) have reinforced their capacities to carry out 
IFAP activities at the national level. Africa was also prioritized through two Policy Dialogues 
on IFAP Priority Are as in South Africa and Zimbabwe , funded with the generous 
contribution of the Republic of Korea through the “ICT Transforming Education in Africa” 
project. The fora drafted concrete action plans that can contribute to revitalizing the existing 
IFAP structu res in the BRICS and African countries. Three new National IFAP Committees 
were created in Eritrea, Mozambique and Zimbabwe. SIDS countries were also prioritized 
through joint Memory of the World/IFAP workshop s in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
and Sint Maartens to harnessed knowledge societies for sustainable socioeconomic 
development.  
4. Out of the 24 National IFAP Committees, 18 National IFAP Committees reported on 
activities that are being implemented in their respective countries in all six priority areas of 
IFAP; many activities are cross -sectoral. National IFAP Committees have been involved in 
addressing the ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence on knowledge societies and 
serving as a conduit to advocate the use of the UNESCO Inte rnet Universality Indicators 
at the national level  and discussing the ethical implications of Artificial intelligence at the 
national level (Gabon and South Africa) . 
5. The IFAP Bureau, Chairs or Rapporteur also advocated for inclusive knowledge societies 
during some 2 9 international fora in 2018 and 2019 at UNESCO Headquarters on Artificial 
Intelligence, multilingualism, prevention of online violent extremism, Blockchain 
technologies and cyber security.  There were 37 events worldwide where IFAP was actively 
promoting its strategic priorities from 2018 to 3 August 2020.  IFAP representatives 
attended events organized in Argentina, Australia, Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, Ghana, 
Hungary, India, Japan, Malaysia, Kyrgyzstan, Morocco, the Netherlands, Oman, Peru, 
Pakistan, Paraguay,  the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, 
Switzerland, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, Turkey and Viet Nam on all six priority 
areas of IFAP.  
6. New partnerships, as a result of these engagements in international for a, are also 
under  way for efforts and initiatives in information literacy, information preservation and 
multilingualism . Partnerships with IFLA, the United Nations University and several 
UNESCO Chairs highlighted IFAP’s long history of working closely with  other United 
Nations agencies and civil society. Furthermore, in the framework of IFAP’s support to 
UNESCO’s facilitation of Action line C10 of the WSIS Follow -up (Ethical dimensions of the 
information society), cooperation has been reinforced in order to  ensure multi -stakeholder 3 
 consultation, research, and policy backstopping for the development of ethically aligned 
ICT policies and programmes.  
7. Pilot projects are currently being implemented in Latin America and the Caribbean and 
Commonwealth of Independent States but also at the national level in Africa, Europe, the 
Arab States and Asia. The pilot projects generate recommendations that vary from 
promoting peaceful and inclusive societies by preventing violent extremism, addressing  
the gender divide through ICT skills development and raising awareness about the 
importance of information preservation. During the 30th IFAP Bureau meeting, the issue of 
increasing digital gender divide was also raised to which the Member States highligh ted 
best practices, such as the “Girls Can Code” Project implemented in Ghana, that address 
challenges to get more women into decision -making processes in the ICT field.   
8. IFAP structures support the elaboration and use of sets of indicators that monitor an d report 
on global engagements with information for development, media and information literacy 
and information preservation. Through the Korean Funds in Trust project “ICT 
Transforming Education in Africa”, UNESCO conducted a study to understand the statu s 
of Media and Information Literacy practices among teacher trainers in Rwanda. Through 
the Magnetic Tape Alert project the International Association of Sound and Audiovisual 
Archives (IASA) is supported to conduct a survey of existing audiovisual document s on 
magnetic tape that are not yet digitally preserved. The application of the Internet 
Universality Indicators is encouraged at the national level , including through the close 
cooperation with National IFAP Committees . 
9. Finally, IFAP also engaged in a res ponse to the COVID -19 crisis by contributing to two 
regional projects that address Media and Information Literacy (MIL) and Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), respectively, in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic. Through the 
project entitled “Media and Informa tion Literacy in the World Affected by COVID -19: How 
to Teach the Teachers”, IFAP has partnered with the UNESCO Institute for Information 
Technologies in Education (IITE), located in Moscow, to train trainers from teacher training 
institutions in nine coun tries on digital media and information literacy (MIL) education.  The 
project “Caribbean Artificial Intelligence Initiative” provides capacity building webinars on 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the context of the COVID -19 crisis  to Caribbean Small Island 
Developing States (SIDS) . It is being i mplemented in partnership with the Broadcasting 
Commission of Jamaica . 
 
III. Improving visibility and supporting fundraising for IFAP  
10. The open -ended Working Group on governance, procedures and working methods of the 
governing bodies of UNESCO , established by the General Conference , called on 
international intergovernmental bodies to enhance visibility , as discussed during the 30 th 
meeting of the IFAP Bureau, in reference to document IFAP -2019/BUREAU.XXX/Inf.4.  
11. At the 30th IFAP Bureau meeting, the importance of visibility of IFAP was discussed . Key 
messages in the six priority areas of IFAP were approved , as well as  keywords, target 
audiences and communication delivery methods in drafting a visibility and outreach 
strategy for IFAP . 
12. As a result, IFAP produced 62 web news articles in English and French on UNESCO’s 
website for the period 2018 to 2019. An average of two web articles were posted per month.   
13. The IFAP website has also been updated and an interactive comme nts webpage has been 
inserted in order to facilitate two -way communication with audiences visiting the IFAP 
website. In addition, the IFAP Wikipedia page has also been updated in English and 
French.  4 
 14. The Secretariat also produced and made available for the public seven short videos that 
present IFAP and its six priorities in English and French.  
15. The IFAP Chairperson participated in events and conferences as a panelist and keynote 
speaker, where she highlighted IFAP’s priorities and work, as well as the Progra mme’s 
relevance in relation to each occasion.   
16. Linking the challenges faced by the COVID -19 pandemic with the theme of the International 
Day for Universal Access to Information (IDUAI), an online international conference is 
planned under the auspices of I FAP from 26 to 28 August  2020 , titled “ Access to 
Information in Time of Crisis - Tackling the UNESCO Information for All Programme's 
Priorities to Address the COVID -19 Pandemic ”. 
 
IV. Governance review  
17. During the biennium of 2018 to 2019, IFAP organized one Council session  and three 
Bureau meetings.  
18. Following the 10th Intergovernmental Council session , it was decided that an open -ended 
Working Group be created in order to:  
• finalize the Statutes of IFAP (article 6 on the election of the Bureau) ; 
• update IFAP’s Rules of Procedures ; 
• prepare recommendations on the nature and modalities of the Working Groups of 
IFAP strengthen IFAP priorities and its Strategic Plan ; 
• prepare recommendations on the agenda o f future Council meetings.   
19. The first open -ended Working Group concentrated its work on finalizing the Statutes of 
IFAP and the IFAP Rules of Procedures. The discussed amendments were based on 
suggested amendments from Hungary,  the Philippines, Switzerlan d and Turkey. The 
revised Statutes of IFAP were adopted at the 40th General Conference of UNESCO. The 
update of the IFAP Rules of Procedure  to align itself with the Statutes, shall be adopted at 
the 11th session of the IFAP Council.  
20. During the three IFAP Bureau meetings, the Bureau discussed the opportunities that the 
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 offers in promoting inclusive knowledge societies, 
as reflected in the IFAP Strategic Plan  2017 -2021 . Specific attention was given to 
celebrating the 2019 International Year of Indigenous Languages and activities have been 
planned in line with the Action Plan  for the International Year . The Working Groups and 
National IFAP Committees, their role and activities were also reviewed in order to enhance 
its contribution to the overall goal of IFAP.  
21. The 30th Bureau Meeting also highlighted the important role of IFAP in empowering women 
in the field of ICTs and encouraging more to join the field to address gender inequalities 
through building the capacity of wo men and girls through ICTs as per the UNESCO Priority 
Gender Equality Action Plan. The Bureau meetings also emphasized the importance of 
partnerships such as those established with the World Commission on the Ethics of 
Scientific Knowledge and Technology ( COMEST) in sensitizing stakeholders and reflecting 
on the implementation of the Preliminary Study on the Ethical Implications of Artificial 
Intelligence and with the International Programme for the Development of Communication 
(IPDC) to foster access to in formation activities.  5 
 22. Finally, IFAP also presented to the Working Group on Governance, procedures and 
working methods of the governing bodies of UNESCO the implementation of the 
recommendations concerning International Intergovernmental Bodies.   
 
V. Allocati ons to Projects and Special Initiatives  
23. IFAP continued to receive in -kind contributions of Member States from China, the 
Philippines, the Russian Federation and Turkey.  
24. The 30th Bureau meeting also took note of the new proposed Financial Rules and 
Regulati ons of the Special Account of IFAP as reflected in document IFAP -
2019/Bureau.XXX/Inf.5, Annex  1.   
25. The 31st IFAP Bureau meeting approved two regional projects to address Media and 
Information Literacy (MIL) and Artificial Intelligence (AI), respectively, in the context of 
COVID -19. 
26. The 31st Bureau meeting assessed the inputs  put forward by  Council Members regarding 
the future orientations of the UNESCO Medium -term Strategy and Programme and Budget. 
These inputs were submitted to  the IFAP Secr etariat in the form of answers to a 
Questionnaire , developed with UNESCO’s Bureau of Strategic Planning, in order t o inform 
the consolidated contribution  of the Communication and Information Sector  to the Director -
General’s Preliminary proposals on draft 4 1 C/4 and draft 41 C/5 . This was in line with the 
39 C/Resolution 87 which advise s that all UNESCO I nternational and Intergovernmental 
Bodies should have the opportunity to submit formal inputs to the draft C/4 and C/5.  