United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
ASSESSING 
INTERNET 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
BRAZIL  
Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
UNESCO SERIES OF INTERNET UNIVERSALITY NATIONAL ASSESSMENTSEXECUTIVE 
SUMMARYIntroduction
How can the Internet develop in line with, and contribute to sustainable 
development? It is through the concept of Internet Universality that UNESCO strives to bring answers to this question.
At its core, Internet Universality is tied to the four ROAM principles – meaning that UNESCO 
stands for an Internet that is human-Rights based, Open, Accessible to all, and governed through 
Multistakeholder participation. This concept, which constitutes the basis of the present national 
assessment report of UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators in Brazil, has been at the heart of UNESCO’s positioning on Internet issues ever since its Member States endorsed it in 2015, during the 38
th General Conference. 
By evaluating a given country’s Internet environment against the ROAM-X indicators, the national assessment process aims to:
•
 Present a comprehensive and substantive understanding of the national Internet environment and
policies;
• Assess their alignment to 
UNESCO’s R.O.A.M. principles and their contribution to sustainable
development;
• Develop policy recommendations and practical initiatives that will enable the country to improvetheir Internet ecosystem as advanced ICT
s evolve.
The present voluntary assessment report of Internet Universality Indicators 
in Brazil is a first, and paves the way for other countries to follow suit. Its production is owed to the excellent work of the Regional Center for Studies 
on the Development of the Information Society (Cetic.br), of the Brazilian Network Information Center (NIC.br), and to the fruitful engagement of the Multisakeholder Advisory Board, represented by the Brazilian Internet Steering Committee (CGI.br). 
It is my hope that the insights and options for action included in this Report will trigger 
fruitful policy discussions, and thereby help bring the Internet in Brazil a step closer to universality and relevance to sustainable development.“
Moez Chakchouk 
Assistant Director-General for Communication and Information, UNESCO
The report is authored by the Regional Center for Studies on the Development of the Information Society (Cetic.br) / Brazilian Network Information Center (NIC.br).
  The full report of Brazil can be downloaded at:   
https://en.unesco.org/internet-universality-indicators/national-assessments
UNESCO Project Coordination: Xianhong Hu
Email: internet.indicators@unesco.org 
Project Website: http://en.unesco.org/internetuniversality 2
CLD 676.20            CI-2020/WS/3R
RightsO
OpennessA
Accessibility 
to AllM
Multistakeholder 
participationX
Cross-Cutting 
issues
THEME A Policy, legal 
and regulatory 
frameworkPolicy, legal 
and regulatory 
frameworkPolicy, legal 
and regulatory 
frameworkPolicy, legal 
and regulatory 
frameworkGender
THEME B Freedom of 
expressionOpen standards Connectivity and 
usageNational Internet 
governanceChildren
THEME C Right of access to 
informationOpen markets Affordability International and 
regional Internet 
governanceSustainable 
development
THEME D Freedom of 
association and 
the right to take 
part in public 
affairsOpen content Equitable access Trust and security
THEME E The right to 
privacyOpen data and 
open governmentLocal content and 
languageLegal and ethical 
aspects of the 
Internet
THEME F Social, economic 
and cultural rightsCapacities/
competencies
UNESCO’S INTERNET UNIVERSALITY 
INDICATORS PUBLICATION  is currently available in English, French, Spanish, and Chinese,  and they are available for downloading at : https://en.unesco.org/internet-universality-indicators/roamx-indicators
UNESCO’S 
INTERNET 
UNIVERSALITY 
INDICATORS8QLWHG1DWLRQV
(GXFDWLRQDO6FLHQWL¿FDQG
&XOWXUDO2UJDQL]DWLRQ
A Framework for Assessing Internet Development3Major findings in Brazil
The development of the national environment of the Internet in Brazil is strong and positive, and in line with international 
standards when considering the regulatory framework. However, there are enforcement problems in some areas and significant shortcomings in access and connectivity for citizens.
Although there has been an increase in access to the Internet for Brazilians, there are still inequalities in the conditions for 
use and appropriation of ICTs, which can be pointed out as one of the most critical national issues for Internet development.
RIGHTS
Brazil has a structured sectorial regulatory framework. Its guiding principles are present in the Federal Constitution of 1988 and can be applied to the digital environment. This is the case for individual rights and guarantees, such as freedom of expression, the right to information, and privacy. Since 2014, the Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the Internet
1 has been 
the main Internet sectorial legislation approved. The Civil Rights Framework can be considered an international reference for its novel approach, which clearly defines the civil rights that are to be protected online. It is strongly aligned with human rights standards and affirms that access to the Internet is essential to the exercise of citizenship. The law also provides strong protection for net neutrality and freedom of expression.
There are, however, enforcement challenges for the guarantees contained in the Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the 
Internet, such as freedom of expression, which is sometimes curtailed by decisions of the Judiciary or online platforms.
Although Brazilian legislation does not provide for sanctions such as blocking or filtering, since 2015 there have been nine 
judicial cases requesting the blocking of applications such as WhatsApp and Facebook; four were carried out, mostly justified by non-compliance with judicial orders for data delivery. 
The Personal Data Protection Law (LGPD) was approved in 2018. It is in line with international standards, in particular the 
European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR); however, it is not clear how the implementation of the law will be carried out since there was a presidential veto of some of its provisions when the Law was approved.
The Access to Information Law (LAI)
2 has been in force since 2011. The LAI has heralded a new culture of transparency and 
accountability in the public sector, especially in federal administrative bodies. However, its application is still fragile in certain 
federal administrative bodies and, more emphatically, in other federation units (states and municipalities). In recent years, there have also been cases of threats, intimidation, harassment and constraint for seeking public information through this law.
OPENNESS
Regarding innovation, the legal and regulatory framework is to some extent conducive to innovative practices and the establishment of new businesses. The situation differs depending on the perspective analyzed. The legal framework for the Internet is considered positive for fostering innovation. The general framework for business is bureaucratic and criticized by the private sector. Policies to foster innovation have recently been changed and cannot yet be assessed.
1  L aw nº 12.695/2014, available at http:/ /www.planalto.gov.br/CCIVIL_03/ _Ato201 1-2014/2014/Lei/L12965.htm
2
  L
aw nº 12,527 /201 1, available at http:/ /www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/ _ato201 1-2014/201 1/lei/l12527 .htm4The Brazilian Open Data Policy, enacted in 20163, has strong foundations. Its objectives include the promotion of transparency 
and social participation and the development of government services. Exceptions are made for technical requirements essential 
to the adequate provision of services and applications and prioritization of emergency services.
ACCESSIBILITY
Internet connectivity is a critical point of the Brazilian digital scenario. Although Brazil has an increasing number of Internet 
users, there is still a large population without any type of access, especially among the poorest, those who are over 60 
years old, and those living in rural areas. Data also indicates that fixed access, especially among groups with lower rates 
of connection, has not evolved to the point of being considered as contributing to universalization, since mobile connections 
are the main driver of Internet diffusion.
Another area of concern is the use of ICTs in schools. As the set of indicators reveal, although some specific public policies have 
been implemented over the last decade, access to and use of ICTs in Brazilian schools have not yet progressed satisfactorily. 
Different sectors that have been interviewed for this research have pointed out that persistent challenges to universalization 
in the last decade are related to: lack of effectiveness of government telecommunication development policies, especially 
in poorer regions and those not served by high-speed networks; failure to invest resources, especially sectorial funds, in 
universalization policies; lack of support for small Internet Service Providers (ISPs) operating in regions of low commercial 
interest; and continued influence of a model that places fixed telephony at the centre of sectorial regulation. 
Accessibility for people with disabilities is another issue where enforcement is far from complying with the law. Although the 
Brazilian Inclusion Law and the Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the Internet define a clear reference for government and 
the business sector in this field, in neither case is accessibility a reality.
MULTI-STAKEHOLDER
The Internet governance environment is led by the Brazilian Internet Steering Committee (CGI.br)4, the purpose of which is to 
coordinate and integrate Internet service initiatives in Brazil and to promote technical quality, innovation and dissemination 
of Internet services. The committee is made up of representatives from the government, the corporate sector, the third sector 
and the academic community, and has been directly electing representatives from civil society since 2004.
The multi-sectoral environment anchored in CGI.br also allowed the development and consolidation of the national Internet 
Governance Forum5, currently in its ninth edition, which has increased Brazilian participation in international governance 
forums, especially the Regional IGF (LAC IGF) and global IGF.
CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
Although the Internet opens up new possibilities for participation, emancipation, and promotion of human rights, new types 
of human rights violations also find fertile ground in the digital environment. From this perspective, data on online abuse and 
harassment are worrying.
In general, experts recognize the existence of a Brazilian legal framework to protect women against violence and abuse 
and some policies implemented by the federal administration. However, there are still problems in its applicability because 
of endogenous problems with the judicial and public security systems.
3  Presidential Decree nº 8.777 /16, available at http:/ /www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/ _Ato2015-2018/2016/Decreto/D8777 .htm
4  Information in English about CGI.br is available at http:/ /www.cgi.br/about/
5  Brazilian Internet Forum: http:/ /forumdainternet.cgi.br/5Key Policy Recommendations  
for Actions in Brazil
OVERARCHING RECOMMENDATIONS
• Consolidate and develop the national multi-stakeholder governance model, expanding the participation of the various sectors in 
forums and organizations related to Internet governance and telecommunications policy and regulation in Brazil.
• Record and publish quantitative and qualitative data on the participation of the different sectors (private, public and third sector) 
in IGF (including LAC IGF), ITU and ICANN forums.
GOVERNMENT
• Create an independent National Personal Data Protection Authority and a National Council for the Protection of Personal Data, 
complementing the normative framework put into force with the enactment of the Personal Data Protection Law6.
• Expand and improve policies for the preservation and promotion of cultural heritage online.
• Promote policies and regulations focused on overcoming barriers to new digital businesses and start-ups.
• Guarantee full accessibility for persons with disabilities on government portals and public websites. 
• Ensure adequate levels of resources for the monitoring and supervisory activities of regulatory bodies.
• Ensure that telecom norms and regulations avoid unnecessary and bureaucratic rules and properly enforce those that guarantee 
public interest.
• Promote technical measures for ensuring technical monitoring of network neutrality.
• Fully apply the open data policy, publishing open data plans and all databases or information not protected by law.
• Make all public websites, especially those that support public services, available on any browser.
• Implement an access and telecommunications development policy that addresses infrastructure bottlenecks in localities identified 
as having little or no service by broadband networks, with a focus on rural areas and locations of low economic attractiveness. 
• Update regulatory models that switch the focus from fixed telephony to broadband.
• Enforce the provision of accessibility for persons with disabilities included in the Statute on Inclusion of Persons with Disability 
and the Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the Internet.
• Seek universal access to the Internet in urban and rural public schools based on high standards of connectivity that overcome 
bottlenecks in access and use.
• Supply all the necessary inputs for effective pedagogical use in schools, such as high-speed connections, devices, high-quality 
digital content, and teacher training.
• Promote public materials for training the workforce on ICT use and development.
• Strengthen the instruments for online participation and consultation on topics of social interest in all institutional bodies at all 
levels of government.
6 Editor’s Note (August 2019): Since the completion of this report, the Personal Data Protection Law has been modified by an Executive Order, which created the Data 
Protection Authority directly linked to the Presidency, leaving room for a revision in two years that can lead to a switch to indirect administration, with more independence 
and autonomy.6• Extend and accelerate the digitization of public services and strengthen the application of the Access to Information Law in 
all public agencies of all units of the federation, overseeing compliance comprehensively at the federal level and promoting 
enforcement at the state and municipal levels.
• Record and publish government submissions to international forums concerned with ICT and the Internet.
• Enhance law enforcement against the crime of online harassment and violence against women.
• Promote initiatives for receiving claims and gathering data about human rights violations on the Internet, particularly discrimination, 
harassment and other crimes committed against children and women, and promote a culture of peace and respect in the online 
environment.
• Include the private and third sectors in the debate on cybersecurity, maintaining the principles of caution and confidentiality.
JUDICIARY
• Avoid over-inclusive first-instance decisions that generate blocking of apps or of entire Internet segments. 
• Protect freedom of association online and refrain from considering illegal any situation that may violate the right to peaceful 
assembly and association.
PRIVATE SECTOR
• Report on governmental or judicial attempts to hold companies liable for content that infringes on third parties, in conflict with 
the Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the Internet.
• In their report on governmental or judicial requests for content removal, platforms should differentiate judicial and executive orders, 
and separate all the different cases (such as IP infringement) by country.
• Guarantee full accessibility for persons with disabilities on private portals and apps, with special attention to public service 
providers.
• Enhance 4G coverage in the country, reaching all municipalities, and enable mobile communication in all districts.
• Promote materials for training the workforce on ICTs use and development.
• Deepen and strengthen existing initiatives for monitoring and combating human rights violations on the Internet, particularly 
discrimination, harassment and other crimes committed against children and women, and promote a culture of peace and 
respect in the online environment.
• Report on the incidence of breaches and the numbers of individuals and businesses affected.
CIVIL SOCIETY
• Monitor and periodically report on violations of the rights supported by the Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the Internet.
• Monitor and periodically report on accessibility for persons with disabilities on public and private websites and apps.
• Monitor and periodically report on network neutrality violations through citizens’ assessment of their connections. 
• Monitor the provision of accessibility for persons with disabilities included in the Statute on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities 
and the Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the Internet.
• Deepen and strengthen existing initiatives for monitoring and combating human rights violations on the Internet, particularly 
discrimination, harassment and other crimes committed against children and women, and promote a culture of peace and 
respect in the online environment.
ACADEMIC AND TECHNICAL COMMUNITY
• Develop systematic research on new challenges to ensuring freedom of expression, access to information and privacy in the 
digital realm.
• Evaluate the positive and negative effects of different billing models on the democratization of access to the Internet.
• Provide proposals for curricula, activities and training materials regarding the use of ICT at all educational levels.
• Promote studies and recommend procedures, rules and technical and operational standards for the security of the network and 
services on the Internet.
• Monitor and publicly report on the incidence of breaches and the numbers of individuals and businesses affected.7“Ten years ago, in 2009, the 
“Principles for the Governance 
and Use of the Internet in Brazil,” 
known as the CGI.br Decalogue 
of Principles, was approved and 
disseminated. It was received with enthusiasm 
by the global Internet community when it was 
announced internationally during the 2010 Internet 
Governance Forum (IGF) in Vilnius, Lithuania. These 
principles represented the key components of the 
discussion that led to the approval of the Brazilian 
Civil Rights Framework for the Internet in 2014. 
This achievement put the international spotlight on 
the country for establishing a framework for the 
development and protection of the Internet based 
on civil rights.
There is still much to be done to achieve universal 
Internet access, ensure the protection of citizens’ rights online, and maintain an innovative and open environment. For 
these reasons, it is imperative to have extensive knowledge about the ecosystem of Internet development in the country. 
Traditionally, international frameworks for measuring information and communication technologies have been focused 
on the dimensions of access and infrastructure. With the publication of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization’s (UNESCO) “Internet Universality Indicators,” we are given the opportunity to use a developed 
concept of the national Internet universality to help comprehend future developments.”
Demi Getschko 
Brazilian Network Information Center – NIC.br
38TH GENERAL CONFERENCE RESOLUTION 
In November 2015, UNESCO’s 38th General Conference endorsed the CONNECTing the Dots Outcome Document and 
the concept of Internet Universality. This concept summarizes UNESCO’s updated positions in the digital age and points to 
four fundamental R.O.A.M principles: the Internet should be (i) human Rights-based (ii) Open, (iii) Accessible to all, and (iv) 
nurtured by Multi-stakeholder participation. 
31ST IPDC COUNCIL RESOLUTION 
In November 2018, the 31st session of UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Council of the International Programme for the 
Development of Communication (IPDC) “endorsed the use of the Internet Universality Indicators on a voluntary basis as a 
useful resource available for Member States”. The Council further “encouraged interested Member States and all stakeholders 
to conduct national assessments of Internet development with the Internet Universality Indicators” and to “use the research 
findings for evidence-based policy discussions and recommendations”. 
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
The full report of Brazil can be downloaded at:  
https://en.unesco.org/internet-universality-indicators/national-assessments