COVID-19: 
The role of judicial operators 
in the protection and 
promotion of the right to 
freedom of expression
GUIDELINES
Highlights
• Judges and courts, both at national and regional levels, will find these guidelines useful to ensure the 
application of international and regional human rights standards of freedom of expression and privacy 
when ruling on cases involving States’ responses to the COVID-19 outbreak that have an impact to 
freedom of expression, press freedom, access to information, privacy and safety of journalists.
• When resorting to state of emergency powers to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic, States must 
comply with requirements, criteria and procedures established by international and regional legal 
instruments to safeguard citizens’ fundamental rights and prevent abuses and arbitrariness.
• While reporting on the pandemic, journalists may become targets of attacks and intimidations and 
face limitations due to imposed restrictions. Their work should be considered as the provision of an 
essential service, therefore protection must be provided and any violations to their safety should be 
thoroughly investigated and prosecuted. 
• The development of health data collection tools to track infections and properly identify potential 
disseminators of the virus should consider the effects on the right to privacy, and therefore, observe 
international standards regarding data protection.
• Measures to counter disinformation should avoid general prohibitions on the dissemination of 
information and assess the impacts on freedom of expression, applying always the three-part test 
(provided by a law, pursuing a legitimate aim, and necessary and proportional in a democratic society) 
to check the conformity with international human rights standards. 
CI-2020/FEJ/ME-1COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
1Foreword
The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken worldwide in response to the outbreak 
have had significant implications for human rights. Over the past months, several national 
authorities have declared states of emergency, restricting many fundamental rights including 
freedom of expression, access to information and privacy. In addition, some governments 
have adopted laws to fight disinformation, and it is likely that judicial authorities will soon 
have to rule on cases related to freedom of the press and freedom of expression in relation to 
these measures.
As the United Nations’ specialized agency with a specific mandate to promote and protect 
freedom of expression and its corollaries, press freedom and access to information, 
UNESCO seeks to sensitize all relevant actors, and in particular those working in judicial 
systems, such as judges, prosecutors and lawyers on the importance of guaranteeing these 
fundamental human rights. To that effect, since 2013, UNESCO and its partners have 
trained over 17,000 judicial actors and representatives of civil society from Latin America 
and Africa on international and regional standards related to freedom of expression.
These guidelines were developed in continuity with this project, and specifically follow 
a series of three webinars (in Spanish , English, and French ) for judicial operators on 
legal challenges on freedom of expression in relation with the COVID-19 pandemic. The 
webinars were organized in partnership with the Bonavero Institute of Human Rights 
(Faculty of Law, University of Oxford), the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism 
(Department of Politics and International Relations, University of Oxford), the Knight 
Center for Journalism in the Americas, the Office of the Special Rapporteur of Freedom of 
Expression at the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, as well as with regional 
human rights courts such as the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the African 
Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and the ECOW AS Court of Justice. They also notably 
benefited from the support of Open Society Foundations.
The aim of these guidelines is to provide support for judges and members of the judiciary 
for the protection and promotion of the right to freedom of expression during and in the 
aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is our hope at UNESCO that those using these 
guidelines will gain a deeper understanding of the theoretical frameworks underpinning the 
right to freedom of expression, as well as the skills to put this theory into practice, during 
and beyond this time of crisis.
Freedom of Expression and Safety of Journalists Section
Communication and Information Sector
UNESCOCOVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
21 https://www.achpr.org/pressrelease/detail?id=483Introduction
The rapid emergence of COVID-19 has led to an unprecedented global crisis. This serious 
crisis exerts pressure and affects governments, which not only adopted exceptional 
decisions in relation to an unexpected situation, but are also placed under due scrutiny 
from the citizens, who would expect appropriate measures and adequate information 
from those who have the responsibility to guarantee public health.
The governance systems of liberal and democratic societies have been at least temporarily 
altered. Campaigns and elections have been postponed, parliamentary sessions are taking 
place with a reduced number of participants or via videoconference, functioning of justice 
bodies is suspended or slowed, and the provision of essential public services is seriously 
affected.  The right to information is put on hold in many cases, affecting citizens’ access 
to comprehensive data about infection rates, testing regimes, government contracting 
arrangements, and the spending of public funds during the pandemic. 
In other words, the institutional mechanisms that are at the very heart of the rule of law 
systems and their checks-and-balances systems have been strongly impacted. Several 
countries have also used the special circumstances associated with the pandemic in order 
to tighten up already existing restrictions to fundamental rights, to introduce new ones, 
and to increase the control of the activities of citizens.
In particular, the exercise of freedom of expression, the situation and activity of 
journalists and the media, and citizens’ right of access to public information have been 
specially affected by this major crisis. Many emergency provisions as well as existing 
laws and regulations have been used to directly restrict the exercise of such rights and to 
introduce further controls using the rationale of the need to protect public health.
Besides of the fundamental character of rights that require protection, there is also 
evidence that respect for rights is also fundamental for countering the COVID-19 
pandemic and its effects. For example, press freedom enables the media to investigate and 
expose dangerous falsehoods about the virus, providing an alternative to incorrect content 
that is circulated without challenge within closed messaging apps. Freedom of expression 
allows the public to debate policy responses to the pandemic, and hold duty-bearers 
accountable for their actions.
Avoiding a “binary choice” about safeguarding rights versus preserving economic life,   
the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, has called for respect of both. 
“The African Commission recognizes the legitimacy of the concerns regarding the socio-
economic impacts of some of the measures for preventing and containing COVID-19 
particularly for the socio-economically vulnerable sections of society and, recalling its 
statement of 28 February on COVID-19, reiterates the obligation of States to ensure that 
the measures adopted comply with the principle of legality, are necessary and proportional 
to the objective of safeguarding public health and are accompanied by contextually 
tailored policy measures for mitigating the adverse impacts, particularly on the most 
vulnerable section of society. ” 1 The Commission goes on to stress the need for compliance 
with the principles of legality, non-discrimination and equality, access to information, 
protection of vulnerable groups, and monitoring measures, amongst others.
In the coming months and years, judges and courts, both at national and regional levels, 
will be increasingly requested to review some of the decisions adopted in this crisis 
context, as well as hear cases about the interpretation of these decisions in regard to how 
they are actually being enforced by agents of the state.
The purpose of this document is to support judicial operators in these processes. 
In particular, these guidelines promote the proper consideration and correct 
understanding of applicable international and regional standards, thus upholding the 
adequate and effective protection of the fundamental right of freedom of expression 
and freedom of information beyond the specificities of the respective national laws. COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
3Pandemic and 
state of emergency
According to international law, during times of public emergency which threatens the life 
of nations, States may take measures derogating from certain of their human rights 
obligations and commitments under international and regional law instruments to the 
extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation. Such a provision can be found in 
article 4 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (the Covenant)2, article 
27 of the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights (the Inter-American Convention)3 
and article 15 of the European Convention on Human Rights (the European Convention)4.
The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights (the African Charter)5 does not contain 
any provision in this specific area. In any case, besides the possibility of applying derogations 
provided for in regional instruments, when available, any state can adopt emergency 
measures on the basis of the rules, principles and constraints included in the mentioned 
article 4 of the Covenant.
General Comment number 29 of the United Nations Human Rights Committee (the 
HRCttee) is devoted to the issue of states of emergency within the framework of the 
mentioned article 4 of the Covenant. This General Comment provides a wide range of 
criteria and recommendations regarding the interpretation of this article. The most relevant 
ones in this context are the following:
• States must act within their constitutional and other provisions of law that 
govern the proclamation of the state of emergency and the exercise of emergency 
powers. These norms usually establish specific conditions, requirements and 
procedures regarding the adoptions of these exceptional regimes. This being said, 
such provisions must be interpreted in line with international and regional 
standards. 
• In situations other than an armed conflict, States should carefully consider the 
justification and reasons why such a measure is necessary and legitimate in the 
circumstances.
• Measures are limited to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the 
situation. This requirement relates to the duration, geographical coverage and 
material scope of the state of emergency and any measures of derogation resorted 
to because of the emergency. 
• Some of the provisions of the Covenant cannot be subject to derogation in any 
case. Other articles in the Covenant (including article 19, protecting freedom of 
expression) cannot be subjected to derogations at will, even where a threat to 
the life of the nation exists. States hold the legal obligation to narrow down all 
derogations to those strictly required by the exigencies of the situation. 
No measure derogating from the provisions of the Covenant may be inconsistent 
with the State party’s other obligations under international law, particularly the 
rules of international humanitarian law. 
• State availing themselves of the right of derogation must immediately inform 
the other states parties, through the United Nations Secretary-General, of the 
provisions they derogated from and of the reasons for such measures.
2 https://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx 
3 https://www.cidh.oas.org/basicos/english/basic3.american%20convention.htm 
4 https://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_ENG.pdf 
5 https://www.achpr.org/legalinstruments/detail?id=49 COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
46 https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CCPR/COVIDstatementEN.pdf
7 A/HRC/44/L.18/Rev.1. Available online at: https://undocs.org/A/HRC/44/L.18/Rev.1The European Convention and the Inter-American Convention contain similar (and 
complementary) regimes in this area, including the regime of notification to the relevant 
body of the respective regional organization.
The HRCttee has also adopted, on 24 April 2020, a specific statement on derogations from 
the Covenant in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. The statement reminds and 
reiterates the general principles and recommendations contained in General Comment 
number 29. It also contains relevant specific indications, including the following6:
• Competent authorities should replace COVID-19-related measures that prohibit 
activities relevant to the enjoyment of fundamental rights with less restrictive 
measures that allow such activities to be conducted, while subjecting them as 
necessary to public health requirements, such as physical distancing.
• States shall not derogate human rights protections if they are able to obtain their 
public health objectives on the basis of non-exceptional provisions. This is 
particularly relevant vis-à-vis possible restrictions to the right to freedom of 
expression inasmuch as according to article 19 of the Covenant (together with 
article 13 of the Inter-American Convention, article 10 of the European Convention 
and Principle 9.3 of the Principles on Freedom of Expression and Access to 
Information in Africa), this right can be subject to certain restrictions provided 
by law and are necessary and proportionate (three-part test) for the protection of 
public health. 
• Freedom of expression and access to information and a civic space where a public 
debate can be held constitute important safeguards for ensuring that States 
parties resorting to emergency powers in connection with the COVID-19 
pandemic comply with their obligations under international and regional 
human rights standards. 
Additionally, on 14 July 2020, the United Nations Human Rights Council has adopted a res-
olution that requires States to “refrain from using (…) public health laws to restrict the right 
to freedom of opinion and expression in ways that are contrary to their obligations under 
international law, including by ensuring that all measures taken to counter threats related to 
(…) public health are in full compliance with international human rights obligations (…)”7 .
Within this general framework, judicial operators need to particularly consider the follow-
ing additional factors:
• Some national authorities may use the public health crisis to unduly legitimise 
the adoption of restrictive measures to the right to freedom of expression 
and freedom of information that may be too broad in their enunciation to 
respect the principle of legal certainty, not proven necessary within an open, 
pluralistic and democratic society to protect public health, or turn out to impose 
a disproportionate restriction to the mentioned right. These measures may also 
be accompanied by exceptional restrictions and derogations to other connected 
fundamental rights, imposed without following the requirements, criteria and 
procedure established by international and regional law.
• Despite the existence of international and regional mechanisms of notification and 
supervision of state of emergency declarations and the corresponding measures, 
national courts and judges are the first instance in the protection of human 
rights. National judicial operators are thus to play a fundamental role in 
reviewing the mentioned decisions.  
In addition to the previous documents and standards, and still from a general perspective, 
it is important to note that the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights adopted its COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
58 Available online at: https://www.oas.org/en/iachr/decisions/pdf/Resolution-1-20-en.pdf 
9 Available online at: http://www.corteidh.or.cr/tablas/alerta/comunicado/Statement_1_20_ENG.pdf 
10 Available online at: https://rm.coe.int/sg-inf-2020-11-respecting-democracy-rule-of-law-and-human-rights-in-th/16809e1f40  
11 See Michèle Oliver, “The relevance of ‘soft law’ as a source of international human rights” , Comparative and International Law Journal of Southern 
Africa, Volume 35, Issue 2, Nov 2002, p. 289 – 307. 
12 https://www.un.org/africarenewal/news/coronavirus/cross-regional-statement-%E2%80%9Cinfodemic%E2%80%9D-context-covid-19
13 A/HRC/44/49. Available online at: https://freedex.org/wp-content/blogs.dir/2015/files/2020/04/A_HRC_44_49_AdvanceEditedVersion.pdf See 
also the common statement of 19 March 2020 issued by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the OSCE Representa-
tive on Freedom of the Media and the OAS Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression, available online at: 
https://www.osce.org/representative-on-freedom-of-media/448849
14 See the Statement of 14 April 2020 released by the International Conference of Information Commissioners. Available online at: 
https://www.informationcommissioners.org/covid-19Pandemic and the fundamental 
right to freedom of expression: 
derogation vs reinforcement
As mentioned by the HRCttee, the adjudication of exceptional powers, particularly regard-
ing the scope and exercise of important fundamental rights, increases the need to count on a 
solid system of checks and balances in order to prevent any abuse or arbitrariness.
It has also been indicated that judges and courts of all levels must definitely play a central 
role in guaranteeing accountability of public authorities in these circumstances. Besides the 
traditional rule of law mechanisms, the right to freedom of expression and freedom of 
information supports a series of conclusions of fundamental importance. As the United 
Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of 
opinion and expression (the Special Rapporteur) has expressed in a report particularly 
focusing on disease pandemics and the mentioned right13,  “(i)ndividuals and their 
communities (…) cannot protect themselves against disease when information is denied to 
them, when they have diminished trust in sources of information, and when propaganda 
and disinformation dominate the statements of public authorities” . The proper protection 
of this right will therefore facilitate and preserve keeping the public educated about the 
pandemic, ensuring that health-care professionals have access to global information 
about the disease and the steps to address it, guaranteeing that the public have access 
to information held by public authorities concerning the pandemic and media and 
journalists are properly able to report about the different aspects and implications of the 
pandemic14 .Resolution 1/2020 on “Pandemic and Human Rights in the Americas”8, the Inter-American 
Court on Human Rights published a statement on “COVID-19 and Human Rights”9, and 
the Secretary General of the Council of Europe released the document “Respecting democ-
racy, rule of law and human rights in the framework of the COVID-19 sanitary crisis. A 
toolkit for member states” 10. 
It needs to be noted that despite the fact that most of the mentioned documents do not con-
stitute per se sources of binding international law, they may be considered, in many cases, as 
elements of soft law. Moreover, due to their direct connection with binding international le-
gal obligations such as human rights protections, they can legitimately be seen and acknowl-
edged as indicators regarding the way state authorities need to fulfil their obligations in such 
area. In other words, the mentioned documents create an expectation of - and reliance upon 
- compliance by states11. It is also important to highlight that this perspective enjoys the 
support of more than 130 United Nations member countries and official observers who have 
issued a cross-regional statement that steps to counter COVID-19 should be based, inter 
alia, on respect of freedom of expression and press freedom 12.COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
6Main challenges 
for freedom 
of expression 
and freedom of 
information
Access to information
As explained in the UNESCO 2019 in-focus report on 
access to information (ATI)15, this right is founded 
on the broader right to freedom of expression, The right to freedom of expression 
entails according to international 
law standards (and particularly 
Article 19.3 of the Covenant) 
duties and responsibilities for 
those who exercise it, although 
these should never legitimize 
an unjustified restriction of this 
freedom.
This means that, in order to be 
legitimate, all restrictions on 
freedom of expression must 
comply with a three-part test, 
whereby those restrictions must 
follow these principles:
■ Principle of legality. Any 
restriction to the freedom of 
expression must be expressly, 
straightforwardly, and clearly 
prescribed by law in its formal 
and material aspects. 
■ Principle of legitimacy. 
Any restriction must serve to 
attain the imperative objectives 
expressly enumerated in the 
ICCPR to ensure the protection 
of the rights of others, national 
security, public order, public 
health, and morals. 
■ Principle of necessity and 
proportionality. Any restriction 
must be strictly necessary in 
a democratic society for the 
attainment of its imperative 
aims. It must also be strictly 
proportionate to the aim 
pursued, and reasonably 
suited to the attainment of 
its imperative aim. The test 
of necessity is applied in a 
stringent way and, requires a 
demonstrated imperative or 
absolute need to introduce 
restrictions.
15 Available online at: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371485 The 3-Part TestThis means that rather than supporting the imposition 
of limitations or conditions to the right to freedom of 
expression and freedom of information, the current 
context of public health crisis requires that public 
authorities, including the judiciary, provide special 
protection to the different angles of the exercise of 
such right. In other words, freedom of expression 
and unfettered access to public information are to 
be considered as powerful instruments to fight the 
pandemic and improve the health of the population in 
the current difficult circumstances. 
This being said, there may be a few areas where 
due to exceptional material circumstances or the 
imperative necessity to avoid infections caused by 
physical contact, specific and exceptional restrictions 
to the mentioned rights might need to be imposed. In 
such cases, and as already pointed out, no particular 
derogation is needed but rather the establishment 
of such limitations in line with the general regime 
established in article 19 of the Covenant (and the 
related articles of the regional instruments), and 
particularly, respecting the so-called three-part test.     COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
7which encompasses not only the right to impart 
opinion and information, but also the right to 
seek and receive such content. ATI as a right 
is particularly relevant as regards official 
information held by public authorities16. In 2015, 
the UN General Assembly adopted 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs)17. Goal 16 calls on 
all UN Member States to promote peaceful and 
inclusive societies for sustainable development, 
provide access to justice for all and build effective, 
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels, 
and Target 16.10 refers to “ensure public access to 
information and protect fundamental freedoms, 
in accordance with national legislation and 
international agreements” . 
In the already mentioned report on disease pandemics and freedom of opinion and expres-
sion18, the United Nations Special Rapporteur points at a series of fundamental elements 
with regards to the need to properly protect the right to access to information in the context 
of the pandemic: 
• Procedures and mechanisms to provide access to public information may suffer 
temporary disruptions. Such disruptions are acceptable inasmuch as they are 
directly caused by the need to protect staff or avoid physical contact with the citi-
zens. Longer processing and response timelines are now the norm, but they should 
not be an excuse for failing to carry out activities for which there are alternative 
means available (for example, via the use of new technologies) or where there is no 
limited-capacity justification. 
• Additionally, information commissioners must not suspend their obligations 
to provide access to information without clarifying whether they have the legal 
ground to delimit their responsibilities.
• Public authorities need to provide media access to officials, documentation 
and all possible and available information resources. This may include regular 
press briefings by public health and other officials. Independent journalists and 
representatives of different types and categories of media need to be granted ac-
cess to these briefings. The need to avoid physical contact between journalists and 
public officials cannot justify the establishment of measures that may restrict the 
capacity of journalists and media actors to participate at these events and to ask 
questions.  
• The goal in a public health crisis must be for government to provide accurate 
information, or information that is as accurate as possible and, in that case, 
framed appropriately as uncertain or evolving, and clear and honest guidance. 
Failure to comply with this principle may represent a violation of citizens’ right to 
ATI. Further efforts are also to be made to ensure easy, prompt, effective and practi-
cal access to government information of public entities. 
• From a general point of view, any restrictions imposed to the right to access to 
information need to respect the already mentioned three-part test (see the box 
included in page 6).   
16 See the Joint Declaration by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the OSCE Representative on Freedom 
of the Media and the OAS Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression on access to information and secrecy legislation of 6 December 
2004 (available online at https://www.article19.org/resources/joint-declaration-access-information-secrecy-legislation/) and the report 
by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression A/68/362 on the right to access to information (available online at 
https://undocs.org/A/68/362.)   
17 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/ 
18 A/HRC/44/49, paras 18 to 23.COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
8Access to the internet
Access to the internet has become a basic 
pre-condition for the effective and full exercise 
of the rights to freedom of expression and free-
dom of information. 
In 2011, the Special Rapporteur, the Special 
Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 
of the Organization of American States (OAS), 
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe Representative (OSCE) on Freedom of the 
Media, and the African Commission on Human 
and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) Special Rappor -
teur on Freedom of Expression, issued a joint declaration establishing guidelines to protect 
freedom of expression on the Internet, which advocates for promoting universal access to 
the internet and establishes that “cutting off access to the Internet, or parts of the Internet, 
for whole populations or segments of the public (…) can never be justified, including on 
public order or national security grounds” . Likewise, in a report issued in 2017, the Special 
Rapporteur underscores that network shutdowns invariably fail to meet the standard of 
necessity19. This is also applicable to disruptions in the access to specific online services 
or platforms. In the landmark case of Ahmed Yildirim v Turkey , the European Court of Hu-
man Rights20 established that blocking a whole domain name for the purpose of dealing 
with a specific piece of allegedly illegal content always requires “ascertaining whether a 
less far-reaching measure could have been taken” . More recently, on 25 June 2020, the Eco-
nomic Community of West African States (ECOW AS) Court of Justice has ruled that Togo’s 
government decision to shut down the Internet in 2017 during a wave of protests did not 
meet their obligations to implement all the necessary safeguards with regards to the right to 
freedom of expression of the Togolese people21.  
Focusing on the pandemic situation, the Special Rapporteur has underscored the following22 :
• In a moment of global pandemic, access to the Internet is a critical element of 
health-care policy and practice, public information and even the right to life.
• Internet shutdowns during a pandemic affect citizens in general who seek reliable 
information about Government measures, health recommendations or health 
services, but also affect in particular health care workers who need to access 
appropriate information regarding the pandemic. Restrictions to Internet access at 
the time of a health emergency affect everyone from the most local to the global 
level. 
• The importance of digital access to health-care information highlights the profound 
need for expanding infrastructure to allow access in the first place. 
In addition to this, the resolution of the United Nations Human Rights Council of 14 July 
2020 establishes that States must refrain from “imposing restrictions that are inconsistent 
with article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, including on the 
19 A/HRC/35/22, para. 14. Available online at: https://undocs.org/A/HRC/35/22
20 Judgement of 18 December 2012. Available online at: http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/fre?i=001-115705 
21 See the press release of the decision published by Access Now: https://www.accessnow.org/internet-shutdowns-in-togo-illegal/  Access 
Now has also reported that on 3 June 2020 a panel of judges of the Jakarta State Administrative Court ruled that the deliberate 2019 inter -
net shutdowns in Papua and West Papua were illegal. See the press release here: 
https://www.accessnow.org/court-rules-the-internet-shutdowns-in-papua-and-west-papua-are-illegal/ 
22  A/HRC/44/49, paras 24 to 29.COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
9free flow of information and ideas, including through practices such as the use of Internet 
shutdowns to intentionally and arbitrarily prevent or disrupt access to or the dissemination 
of information online” .
Safety of media and journalists
Protecting media and journalists from attacks or 
intimidations of all nature, preventing such threats, 
and the issue of impunity constitute fundamental el-
ements at the core of the effective and full enjoyment 
of the right to freedom of expression and freedom 
of information. Safety of journalists (including 
physical, psychological and legal angles) has been 
placed at the top of the priorities in the human 
rights agenda of most relevant international and 
regional organizations including the United Na-
tions23 , UNESCO24 , the Council of Europe25 , the 
OAS26 , and the ACHPR27 .  
In the particular context of the pandemic, there are several areas where journalists’ safety 
can be particularly compromised, and therefore particular protection must be provided:
• Journalists may be forced to use official sources of information solely or other -
wise face serious legal repercussions. This will be further tackled in the paragraphs 
below.
• Journalists may be arrested and/or questioned by law enforcement on the broad 
basis of the existence of an emergency and exceptional situation.
• Journalists may face limitations to report on the situation and possible disrup-
tions in the operation of hospitals, health care facilities, public transportation 
or other public spaces on the basis of extensive interpretation of the need to avoid 
any contact or infection.
• Journalists reporting on the pandemic may be attacked, intimidated or deni-
grated by public officials in order to avoid the dissemination of non-official narra -
tives and information.
• By doing their job during the pandemic crisis journalists may be putting their 
own health at risk. Therefore, journalists’ work should be considered as the provi -
sion of an essential service and protected and enabled accordingly, including by 
granting access to protective masks and other relevant gear.
• Special attention needs to be paid to the protection of the work of international 
press representatives and the situation of imprisoned journalists.
23 Human Rights Council Resolution 33/2 of 29 September 2016, on the safety on journalists, available online at: 
https://undocs.org/A/HRC/RES/33/2. Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, available online at: 
https://en.unesco.org/un-plan-action-safety-journalists 
24 UNESCO Journalists’ Safety Indicators. Available online at: https://en.unesco.org/themes/safety-of-journalists/journalists-safety-indicators 
25 Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)4[1] of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the protection of journalism and safety of jour -
nalists and other media actors. Available online at: https://search.coe.int/cm/Pages/result_details.aspx?ObjectId=09000016806415d9#_ftn1 
26  Resolution of the General Assembly of the OAS (2017) on the right to freedom of thought and expression and safety of journalists and 
media workers. Available online at: http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/expression/showarticle.asp?artID=1068&lID=1 
27 185 Resolution on the Safety of Journalists and Media Practitioners in Africa, adopted by the African Commission at its 49th Ordinary 
Session, held in Banjul, The Gambia, from 28 April – 12 May 2011. Available online at: https://www.achpr.org/sessions/resolutions?id=181COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
10The disinfodemic
The World Health Organization (WHO) has 
emphasised that “the right message at the right 
time from the right messenger through the 
right medium can save lives” , and thus “misin-
formation or mixed messages can cost lives”28. In 
particular, the WHO is using the term infodemic  
to refer to the issue of a massive proliferation of 
messages that make it difficult to distinguish 
information from inaccurate content (disinfor -
mation and misinformation) within the context of 
the COVID-19 health crisis. 
The problem of false content (misleadingly and 
overly-narrowly also referred to as fake news) goes beyond and existed prior to the pandem-
ic situation, yet it was this context where it has become even more relevant than before.  
According to international freedom of expression standards, the following main criteria and 
principles need to be considered when dealing with such content:
• General prohibitions on the dissemination of information based on vague and 
ambiguous ideas, including “false news” or “non-objective information” , are 
incompatible with international standards for restrictions on freedom of expres-
sion. 
• State actors should not make, sponsor, encourage or further disseminate state -
ments which they know or reasonably should know to be false (disinformation) 
or which demonstrate a reckless disregard for verifiable information (propagan-
da). 
• State actors should, in accordance with their domestic and international legal obli-
gations, and their public duties, take care to ensure that they disseminate reliable 
and trustworthy information, including matters of public interest, such as the 
economy, public health, security and the environment. 
• In order to avoid and discourage disinformation and counter its negative effects, 
public authorities must promote a free, independent and diverse communica-
tions environment, including media diversity, ensure the presence of strong, 
independent and adequately resourced public service media, and take measures 
to promote media and digital literacy 29. 
UNESCO has warned that falsehoods have spread as fast as the virus itself30. These false-
hoods can be categorised both as disinformation (produced and shared with malicious 
motivation), and misinformation (when lies are spread without bad intentions). 
The volume and velocity of false information within the infodemic  points to the existence of 
a toxic disinfodemic  of disinformation and misinformation, as is described in two recent 
UNESCO policy papers on this subject31. These papers contain recommendations address-
ing several stakeholders, including judicial operators. Regarding the latter, it is stressed that:
28 https://www.who.int/teams/risk-communication/infodemic-management 
29 See the Joint Declaration on freedom of expression, “fake news” , disinformation and propaganda adopted on 3 March 2017 by the Special 
Rapporteur, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, the OAS Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and the ACHPR Special 
Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information. Available online at: https://www.osce.org/files/f/documents/6/8/302796.pdf 
30 Issue brief on “Journalism, press freedom and COVID-19” . 
Available online at: https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/unesco_covid_brief_en.pdf
31 Available online at: https://en.unesco.org/covid19/disinfodemic 
COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
11“Judicial operators, particularly judges, could pay special attention 
when reviewing cases related to addressing measures to fight disinfor -
mation, guaranteeing that international standards on freedom of ex-
pression and privacy are fully respected within those measures”. 
The Special Rapporteur has also enunciated32, in line with generally applicable international 
standards, the following guidelines regarding pandemic disinformation:
• State actors must refrain from disseminating or endorsing unverified and often 
reckless claims about the origins of the COVID-19 virus, the responsibility for the 
pandemic, the presence or extent of COVID-19 in their country and the availability 
of drugs to counter the symptoms, and other harmful assertions.
• Consumer protection laws can be vital tools in the effort to protect public health by 
restricting and punishing practices of promising cures which actually constitute 
a fraud.  These laws must respect the three-part test when imposing restrictions on 
speech.
• Any government efforts to counter disinformation should be based on the full, 
honest and evolving communication with the public, the promotion and protec-
tion of an independent press, and the careful and public correction of misinfor -
mation that could lead to public health harm. 
• States should take steps to ensure an enabling environment for independent 
media and educational settings that promote media literacy and otherwise give 
individuals critical-thinking tools to distinguish between verifiable and unverifiable 
claims. 
• Measures to combat disinformation must never prevent journalists and media 
actors from carrying out their work or lead to content being unduly blocked 
on the Internet33. In this sense, any imposition on media and journalists to 
exclusively rely on official sources in their reporting activities will represent an 
excessive and unjustified interference in their right to freely seek and disseminate 
information.
In this context it is of particular importance to point at the role of social media, especially 
large and global companies in the dissemination of all forms of speech, including potentially 
harmful speech (yet not illegal in all the cases).
The United Nations Human Rights Council declared in its decision of 4 July 201834 that “the 
same rights that people have offline must also be protected online, in particular freedom of 
expression,  which is applicable regardless of frontiers and through any media of one’s choice, 
in accordance with articles 19 of the UDHR and ICCPR. ” The already mentioned internation-
al mandate-holders on freedom of expression, in their Joint Declaration of 1 June 2011 on 
freedom of expression and the Internet35, stated that “(w)hen assessing the proportionality 
of a restriction on freedom of expression on the Internet, the impact of that restriction on 
the ability of the Internet to deliver positive freedom of expression outcomes must be 
weighed against its benefits in terms of protecting other interests” . 
32 A/HRC/44/49, paras 41 to 53.
33 See the communique by the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights “Press freedom must not be undermined by measures to 
counter disinformation about COVID-19, available online at:  
https://www.coe.int/en/web/commissioner/-/press-freedom-must-not-be-undermined-by-measures-to-counter-disinformation-about-covid-19
34 A/HRC/38/L.10/Rev.1. Available online at: https://undocs.org/en/A/HRC/38/L.10/Rev.1
35 Available online at: http://www.osce.org/fom/78309 COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
12Also, according to general international standards, online media platforms (including 
social media) must be regulated with a focus on ensuring company transparency and 
remediation to enable the public to make choices about how and whether to engage in 
online forums. Authorities must only seek to restrict content pursuant to an order by an 
independent and impartial judicial authority, and in accordance with due process and 
standards of legality, necessity and legitimacy. States should also refrain from establishing 
laws or arrangements that would require the proactive monitoring or filtering of 
content,  which is both inconsistent with the right to privacy and likely to amount to pre-
publication censorship36. 
There are no complete statistics with regards to the real extension of the disinfodemic , 
although there is some data that shows a very worrying initial picture. On the other hand, 
despite the commitment expressed by big tech companies to properly tackle disinformation 
about the pandemic37, lack of full transparency makes it difficult to assess to what extent and 
how this phenomenon is dealt with38. 
The Special Rapporteur has stressed the challenges being faced by search engines and social 
media during the period of the pandemic. It needs to be noted that precisely due to the 
constraints derived from the health crisis, social media companies have generally reduced 
their content moderation taskforce and relied in a much higher degree on automated 
tools. This creates clear concerns of over-removal of content and increases the possibility 
of committing mistakes by eliminating legitimate content. In particular, the Special 
Rapporteur delivers the following indications to online platforms:
• They must conduct ongoing due diligence to determine the impact their content 
policies are having on the rights to health and to life. 
• They should aim towards maximum transparency of their policies and engage, 
on an urgent basis, not only with public health authorities but with affected 
communities wherever they operate. 
• They should especially review their policies and practices to ensure that content 
moderators are available as soon as possible to review COVID-19 information, as 
reliance solely on automation may have a deleterious impact on health and human 
rights. 
Last but not least, the eruption of the pandemic has also brought a rise of hate speech 
against certain groups. Despite the fact that hate speech can be disseminated on the basis 
of false information, it must be clearly differentiated from disinformation, in that as much 
as they are often combined, the two phenomena can exist independently of each other (for 
instance, false cures for COVID-19 are not a case of hate speech). National authorities 
have the international law obligation to prohibit hate speech, defined as the “advocacy 
of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility 
or violence” (article 20.2 ICCPR). On the other hand, international legal standards 
would tolerate falsehoods unless these were deployed to violate rights such as reputation 
(defamation by false claims), property (expressions designed to defraud persons as in cases 
of peddling false cures), public safety and public health.
As the NGO Access Now has denounced, since the pandemic broke out, a surge in “hate 
36 See the report of the Special Rapporteur of 6 April 2018 on the regulation of user-generated online content. A/HRC/38/35, available online at: 
https://undocs.org/en/A/HRC/38/35
37 “Major tech platforms say they’re ‘jointly combating fraud and misinformation’ about COVID-19” , The Verge 16 Mars 2020. Available 
online at: https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/16/21182726/coronavirus-covid-19-facebook-google-twitter-youtube-joint-effort-misinforma-
tion-fraud 
38 See the data provided by the mentioned UNESCO brief on “Journalism, press freedom and COVID-19”” , pages 4-7.COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
13speech and stigmatization targeting people of particular ethnic backgrounds and those 
presumed to be infected or in contact with people who are ill with the virus” can be noticed, 
both online and offline39. Being true that article 20.2 ICCPR contains a broad and also 
probably vague definition of hate speech, it is the responsibility of the national legislator, 
as well as national judicial operators, to make a proper assessment of each piece of 
content on the basis of principles, rules and conditions established in international law. 
In particular, it is important to note the threshold test on hate speech extracted from the 
Rabat Plan of Action40, which permits to assess if a particular statement reaches the level of 
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence.  The Rabat framework test lays out six 
parameters to check if a statement may amount to a criminal offence. On a case-by-case 
basis, the test looks into the context, speaker, intent, content, extent of the speech, and 
likelihood of harm41.
39 “Fighting disinformation and defending free expression during COVID-19: Recommendations for States” . Available online at: 
https://www.accessnow.org/cms/assets/uploads/2020/04/Fighting-misinformation-and-defending-free-expression-during-COVID-19-recommendations-for-states-1.pdf
40 https://undocs.org/A/HRC/22/17/Add.4 
41 https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/Hate-speech-threshold-test.aspx 
42 See the report of the Special Rapporteur of 17 April 2013 on the implications of States’ surveillance of communications for the exercise 
of the human rights to privacy and to freedom of opinion and expression. A/HRC/23/40, available online at: 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session23/A.HRC.23.40_EN.pdf 
43 A/HRC/44/49, paras 54 to 57.Privacy issues
The legitimate need to be able to track infections 
and properly identify potential disseminators of 
the virus has led to the implementation, in several 
countries, of tools that allow for the collection of 
individual health data.
The development of data surveillance tools may 
have an impact not only on the fundamental 
right to privacy, but also on the exercise of the 
right to freedom of expression and freedom of 
information, as some international documents 
have declared in the course of the last years42.
In this particular area, and considering the circumstances related to the global health crisis, 
the Special Rapporteur has outlined43 the following:
• Health data collection must be accompanied by strict personal data protection 
guarantees and be time limited while also promoting the public’s right to know 
the outcomes of such collection.
• Any authorization of surveillance should be contained in precise and publicly 
accessible laws and only be applied when necessary and proportionate.
• Authorization of surveillance of specified individuals should be based on inde-
pendent evaluation,  preferably by a judicial authority.
• Rigorous record-keeping should be required so that individuals and oversight 
bodies can ascertain that surveillance was conducted for legitimate public health 
purposes.
• Any personal data collected should be subject to strict privacy protections to en-
sure against disclosure of personal information to anyone not authorized for public 
health purposes.
•  Some personal data should be expressly excluded from collection to ensure 
against any government or third-party misuse of such data.COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION14Challenges for the justice systems
The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the 
Independence of Justice and Lawyers has pub-
lished a statement on the challenges for justice 
systems derived from the COVID-19 emergen-
cy44. He points at the fact that the critical situa-
tion “demands specific urgent actions to prevent 
blockages of the justice systems and to guarantee 
now a functioning and independent justice”  and 
calls the attention to a series of crucial aspects. On 
the basis of such document, and considering the 
important role that judicial operators must play 
regarding the effective protection of the most 
fundamental rights and preventing the abuse of 
power,  the following principles or criteria must be outlined:
• Countries may decide to streamline the services being provided by the justice sys-
tems considering the circumstances. In such cases, guaranteeing the protection of 
human rights (including freedom of expression) is to be considered and urgent-
ly declared as a priority.
• Judicial operators are indispensable actors to ensure that authorities do not abuse 
their emergency powers and fundamental rights are properly respected. 
• Judicial systems need to incorporate the necessary tools which will allow for the 
continuation of the provision of this fundamental public service under the cir -
cumstances of the pandemic.
• The use of new technologies to facilitate access to justice during times of health 
crisis needs to take place avoiding social exclusion and excessive or unnecessary 
rigidity, while keeping respect for procedural safeguards. 
• Competent authorities need to provide, as a matter of priority, sufficient financial 
resources  in order for the previously mentioned tools and measures to be properly 
implemented.
• Competent authorities need to consider supporting these reforms beyond the 
period of the pandemic. 
44 Available  online at : https://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=25810&LangID=E COVID-19: THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL OPERATORS IN THE PROTECTION AND PROMOTION 
OF THE RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION15 15• National courts and judges are the first instance in the protection of human rights and 
play a fundamental role in reviewing the decisions regarding the declaration of state of 
emergency and/or exceptional measures affecting fundamental rights.
• The current context of public health crisis requires that public authorities, including 
the judiciary, provide special protection to the different angles of the exercise of the 
right to freedom of expression and freedom of information. Freedom of expression and 
unfettered access to public information are to be considered as powerful instruments 
to fight the pandemic and protect the health of the population. 
• During a public health crisis, state authorities - including the judiciary - must 
guarantee that the information they provide to the public is accurate, or accurate as 
possible framing them appropriately as uncertain or evolving.  These authorities should 
also provide clear and honest guidance. Failure to comply with this principle may 
represent a violation of citizens’ right to access to information.
• In a moment of global pandemic, access to the Internet is a critical element of health-
care policy and practice, public information and even the right to life.
• Journalists shall be properly protected from arrests and/or questioning by law 
enforcement, limitations to report on the situation and possible disruptions in the 
operation of hospitals, health care facilities, public transportation or other public 
spaces. They must also be protected from attacks and intimidation by public officials 
in order to avoid the dissemination of non-official narratives and information, on the 
broad basis of the existence of a health emergency and exceptional situation.
• Journalists’ work should be considered as the provision of an essential service and 
protected and enabled accordingly, including by granting access to protective masks 
and other relevant gear.
• Judicial operators, particularly judges, could pay special attention when reviewing 
cases related to addressing measures to fight disinformation, guaranteeing that 
international standards on freedom of expression and privacy are fully respected 
within those measures.
• When considering possible hate speech cases, it is the responsibility of national 
judicial operators, to make a proper assessment of each piece of content on the basis of 
principles, rules and conditions established in international law.  
• Health data collection must be accompanied by strict personal data protection 
guarantees and be time limited while also promoting the public’s right to know the 
outcomes of such collection.
• Justice systems need to incorporate the necessary tools which will allow for 
the continuation of the provision of this fundamental public service under the 
circumstances of the pandemic.Conclusions/recommendations16About these guidelines
The publication of the guidelines was made possible thanks to the support of the Open Society Foundations.
About the author
Joan Barata works on freedom of expression, media regulation and access to information. He has published a large 
number of articles and books on these subjects. He is regularly involved in projects with international organizations 
such as UNESCO, the Council of Europe, the OAS or the OSCE, where was the principal advisor to the Representative 
on Media Freedom.
Published in 2020 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France ©UNESCO. This document is available in 
Open Access under the Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) License. By 
using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of 
the UNESCO Open Access Repository. The designations employed and the presentation of 
material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or 
of its authorities, or concerning the delimation of its frontiers or boundaries. The ideas and 
opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those
of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. 
