                         
 CI-20/C OUNCIL .32/5 
        Paris, 28 September  2020  
                               Original: English  
 
Distribution limited                           
  
 
 
 
Thirty -second  session  
of the Intergovernmental Council of  
the International Programme  for the Development of Communication  
 
25-26 November 2020  
Room X, Fontenoy Building  
9.30  a.m. - 12.30  p.m. and 2.30 p.m. - 5.30 p.m. 
 
Item 12 of the provisional agenda  
 
First Global R eport 
on the Implem entation of Access to Information Laws  
 
 
This report is submitted to the Intergovernmental Council of the International Programme for 
the Development of Communication (IPDC) in line with the Decision on Monitoring and 
Reporting of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 (Access to Information) adopted by the Counc il at its 31st 
session in November 2018.   
In its Decision, the IPDC Council encouraged the IPDC Secretariat to develop a mechanism 
that could involve and support Member States in data -collection and reporting on SDG 
indicator 16.10.2 on access to informat ion. The Council also invited the IPDC Secretariat to 
publish a biennial report  on  worldwide  progress  towards  SDG  indicator  16.10.2  on access 
to information, with a view to giving visibility to national efforts to monitor and report on access 
to information and to further sensitizing relevant stakeholders on the  important  role  played  
by  access  to information in achieving development goals. In addition, the Council requested 
the Secretariat to report to the IPDC Bureau in 2019 and Council in 20 20, taking into account 
the results of the UN High -Level Political Forum held in New York, July 2019, about the 
progress made on access to information.  
The present report provides an analysis of the subject matter, taking stock of the global 
progress on t he adoption and implementation of legal guarantees on Access to Information, 
based on information provided by Member States through UNESCO’s 2020 Survey on 
Indicator 16.10.2 and other ongoing initiatives in the area.  
 
2 
  
 
Access to Information for Sustainable Development:   
From Promise to Practice  
Report on the Monitoring and Reporting of  
SDG Indicator 16.10.2 (Public Access to Information)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report is submitted to the Intergovernmental Council of the International Programme 
for the Development of Communication (IPDC) in line with the Decision on Monitoring and 
Reporting of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 (Access to Information) adopted by the Counc il at its 
31st session in November 2018.   
 
In its Decision, the IPDC Council encouraged the IPDC Secretariat to develop a mechanism 
that could involve and support Member States in data -collection and reporting on SDG 
indicator 16.10.2 on access to informa tion. The Council also invited the IPDC Secretariat to 
publish a biennial report  on  worldwide  progress  towards  SDG  indicator  16.10.2  on 
access to information, with a view to giving visibility to national efforts to monitor and report 
on access to i nformation and to further sensitizing relevant stakeholders on the  important  
role  played  by  access  to information in achieving development goals. In addition, the 
Council requested the Secretariat to report to the IPDC Bureau in 2019 and Council in 2 020, 
taking into account the results of the UN High -Level Political Forum held in New York, July 
2019, about the progress made on access to information.  
 
The present report responds to the IPDC Council mandate by taking stock of the global 
progress on the  adoption and implementation of legal guarantees on Access to Information, 
based primarily on information provided by Member States through UNESCO’s 2020 Survey 
on Indicator 16.10.2 and other ongoing initiatives in the area.  
 
  
 
 
3 
 Contents  
 
Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  4 
1. Background and context  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  6 
A. Acces s to Information and Sustainable Development  ................................ .............  6 
B. UNESCO and the Monitoring and Reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2  ...............  7 
2. Tracking progress on the adoption of ATI guarantees  ................................ ....................  9 
A. Global and regional overview  ................................ ................................ .........................  9 
B. Leaving No One Behind: Inclusion of disability rights in ATI guarantees  ........  10 
3. Tracking progress on the implementation of ATI  guaran tees: highlights from the 
UNESCO 2020 Survey on SDG Indicator 16.10.2  ................................ ................................ ..... 12 
A. Overview  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  12 
B. Key findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  13 
4. ATI reporting in the Voluntary National Reviews  ................................ .............................  18 
5. Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: Case studies  .............................  21 
A. Latin America and the Caribbean: Regional actions for global goals  ...............  21 
B. Sri Lanka: Promoting transparency across SDGs through Access to 
Information  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 22 
6. Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 27 
7. Draft Decision  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 Executive Summary  
 
Ensuring access to information (ATI) is critical for 
the achievement of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). This is further essential for 
advancing the promotion and protection of human 
rights and it empowers the public to make informed 
choices and e ffectively monitor and hold duty -
bearers to account for SDG progress.  
 
Within the United Nations, UNESCO has been 
designated as custodian agency for reporting on 
global progress by means of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 
concerning public access to information. The  
Indicator looks at “Number of countries that adopt 
and implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy 
guarantees for public access to information.”  
Under this mandate, UNESCO, via its International 
Programme for the Development of Communication 
(IPDC),  has developed a methodology to measure 
and report on the adoption and implementation of 
ATI guarantees. This consists of a survey developed 
with the  UNESCO Institute of Statistics (UIS) and in 
consultation with experts, which yielded valuable 
data throug h a pilot exercise in 43 states  in 2019.1 
The survey, comprising a National Questionnaire 
(targeted at ATI oversight bodies) and an 
Institutional Questionnaire (targeted at public 
authorities), was further refined for submission to all 
Member States in 2020 . 
UNESCO and UIS launched the survey in February 
2020, inviting all UN Member States, including their 
associated territories, to participate in the survey. 
The survey, however, coincided with the COVID -19 
pandemic, and generated only 29 responses. In 
some ca ses, the SDG monitoring bodies were 
constrained due to a disconnect with the ATI 
oversight bodies holding the data. In light of this, 
UNESCO extended the research to collect 
additional responses directly from ATI oversight 
bodies, which raised the total of  responses to 69 
states and associated territories.  
                                                           
1 Powering sustainable development with access to information: highlights from the 2019 UNESCO monitoring and 
reporting of SDG indicator 16.10.2: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000369160?posInSet=2&queryId=6d5dfcc0 -
142b -46ec -a3c9 -6112fc055d6a   
 Goal 16:  
“Promote peaceful 
and inclusive 
societies for 
sustainable 
development, provide 
access to justice for 
all and build effective,  
accountable and 
inclusive  
institutions at all 
levels and inclusive 
societies.”  
 
 Target 16.10:  
“Ensure public 
access to information 
and protect 
fundamental 
freedoms, in 
accordance with 
national legislation 
and international 
agreements.”  
 
 
Indicator 16.10.1:  
 
“Number of verified cases of killing, 
kidnapping, enforced disappearance, 
arbitrary detention and torture of 
journalists, associated media personnel, 
trade unionists and human rights 
advocates in the previous 12 months.”  
 
*OHCHR as Cus todian Agency; 
UNESCO and ILO as Contributing 
Agencies  
 
 
Indicator 16.10.2:  
 
“Number of countries that adopt and 
implement constitutional, statutory and/or 
policy guarantees for public access to 
information.”  
 
* UNESCO as Custodian Agency  
 
5 
 The 2020 survey yields many insights into the main tendencies in the implementation of 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information worldwide. 
The findings enable a  better understanding of the gaps and challenges that need to be 
addressed by countries in their efforts towards achieving the SDGs.  
Among the conclusions arising from the survey is that, while 127 UN Member States have 
adopted various ATI legal guarantee s, states that have not adopted such guarantees could 
boost ATI for their citizens by considering similar steps. Further, the survey shows that even 
where there are guarantees, more efforts are needed to ensure effective implementation of 
ATI. Those respon dents who have a specialised ATI oversight body  are likely to perform better 
in implementation than those without.   
The findings also show that such oversight bodies should be fully functional, i.e. have the 
capacity to perform their duties, which include  the monitoring and reporting of ATI in their 
jurisdiction. In this regard, the survey revealed gaps in record -keeping. Adequate and reliable 
records of the requests and appeals received, and their processing times, are essential for 
generating evidence to  track progress of ATI as part of the SDGs.    
The case studies presented in this report, focusing on Sri Lanka and the Latin American and 
the Caribbean region, give visibility to national and regional co -operation efforts on monitoring 
ATI, and show how pr oactive ATI oversight bodies can contribute to the attainment of SDG 16 
as well as other SDGs.  
Since the pilot phase in 2019, UNESCO’s survey has brought impact beyond measuring 
countries’ progress on achieving SDG Target 16.10. Many local actors, includi ng ATI oversight 
bodies and civil society actors, have been mobilised to network with each other in collecting 
data for the survey. They have also used the information assembled to identify areas of 
improvement. As such, the survey is not only contributing  to assessing SDG Indicator 16.10.2, 
but also to securing ATI implementation.  However, the research process also showed that 
there is a need to link ATI oversight bodies with national SDG processes for monitoring and 
reporting.  
In a bid to ensure greater participation of countries in the monitoring and reporting on Indicator 
16.10.2 towards 2030 and beyond, UNESCO will continue to work with governments, experts, 
civil society and other UN agencies to improve existing data collection and its methodology. 
The objective is to have data collection conducted by countries annually, so that monitoring 
and reporting become sustainable and institutionalised, contributing to an effective 
implementation of ATI laws and the overall attainment of the SDGs.  
 
 
 
 
  6 
 1. Backgro und and context  
 
A. Access to Information and Sustainable Development  
 
Access to information has been acknowledged as a key element of sustainable development 
since the adoption of the Rio Declaration in 1992.2 Further in 2015, the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development3 recognised ATI as a necessary enabling mechanism for 
transparent, accountable and participatory governance, rule of law and peaceful societies as 
epitomised by Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) number 16: ‘Peace, Justice and Strong 
Institutions’. Target 16.10 calls for states to “ensure public access to information and protect 
fundamental freedoms, in accordance with n ational legislation and international agreements”.  
In 2015, UNESCO’s 38th General Conference declared 28 September as the International Day 
for Universal Access to Information. UNESCO’s co -operation with Member States, UN bodies 
and African civil society s aw the status of the celebration being elevated when  the 74th UN 
General Assembly  in October 2019 also proclaimed the Day at UN level.4 
All this momentum ha s accompanied and reinforced concrete steps towards tracking the 
progress on ATI. SDG Indicator 16.10.2 was agreed by the UN Statistics Commission in 2016 
and approved by the UN General Assembly in 2017.5 The Indicator measures the adoption 
and implementat ion of constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to 
information in accordance with Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and  of 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  
Conceptually, ‘public ac cess to information’ refers to the presence of an effective system to 
meet citizens’ rights to seek and receive information, particularly that held by or on behalf of 
public authorities. Several existing frameworks and documents recognised internationally6 
mention principles of ATI, including existence of legal frameworks with provisions for access 
to information such as limited exemptions; obligation of public authorities to provide information 
(including proactively); oversight and appeals mechanism; and record keeping. These 
principles of ATI, are often reflected, to varying degrees, in Freedom of Information (FOI) or 
Right to Information (RTI) laws and/or policies.7 
The Human Rights Council in its 2020 resolution on freedom of opinion and expression 
(General Assembly A/HRC/44/L.18/Rev.1 )8 at its 44th regular session recognises that “public 
authorities should strive to make information available, whether the information is proactively 
published electronically, or provided upon request...” . The Council further elaborated on 
elements for related laws an d policies.  
                                                           
2 https://www.unenvironment.org/news -and-stories/story/unep -implementing -principle -10-rio-declaration  
3 Adopted in 2015 by all 193 UN member sta tes, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
(https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld/publication ) is a 15 -year plan of action “ to end 
poverty, protect the planet and ensure prosperity for all, while strengthening universal peace in larger freedom”.  
4 https://en.unesco.org/news/proc laims -international -day-universal -access -information   
5 Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development: https://undocs.org/A/RES/71/313   
6 Such as Article 10 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption; resolutions of the UN General Assembly and 
Human Rights Council; the Commonwealth’s Model Freedom of In formation Bill; Organization of American States (OAS)’s 
Model Law on Access to Information; African Union’s Model Law on Access to Information and reports from the UN the 
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion  and expression.  
7 https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/unpacking_indicator16102.pdf   
8 https://undocs.org/A /HRC/44/L.18/Rev.1   7 
 Within the perspective of the 2030 Agenda, access to information is critical for empowering the 
public to make decisions, holding governments accountable, evaluating public officials in 
implementing and monitoring the SDGs, and facilitating eff ective public participation.  
 
B. UNESCO and the Monitoring and Reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2  
 
Custodianship of SDG Indicator 16.10.2   
Prior to the adoption of the SDGs, the 29th session of the Intergovernmental Council of 
UNESCO’s  International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC) urged 
that freedom of expression, along with the issues of free, independent and pluralistic media 
should be integrated into the Post -2015 Development Agenda. The eventual elaboration of the 
SDG Target 16.10, as well as Indicators 16.10.1 and 16.10.2 was in fact a cumulative effort of 
advocacy by IPDC along with other UN agencies and civil society organizations, including the 
Global Forum for Media Development (GFMD).  
Following the approval of the SDG framework in 2017 by the UN General Assembly, UNESCO 
was designated as the custodian agency for Indicator 16.10.2. Under this mandate, UNESCO 
monitors and reports to the UN Secretary General each year on “the number of cou ntries that 
adopt and implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to 
information”, giving attention to both components: “adoption” and “implementation”.  
In 2019, as a result of UNESCO reporting in previous years to the U N Secretary General, 
Indicator 16.10.2 was upgraded from Tier II to Tier I  —the highest level in the classification 
system developed to r ank SDG indicators .9  This upgrade was agreed by the Inter -agency and 
Expert Group on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators (IAEG -SDGs) in October 2019. 
The reclassification means that Member States now have a further reason to include Indicator 
16.10.2 in their own SDG monitoring strategies.  
 
UNESCO’s work on ATI monitoring and reporting   
In the Decision of the Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC on Monitoring and Reporting of 
SDG Indicator 16.10.2 , adopted by the Council at its 31st session in November 201810, the 
IPDC Council encouraged the IPDC Secretariat, in cooperation with UNESCO’s Information  
For  All  Programme (IFAP), to develop a mechanism that could strengthen UNESCO’ s work 
as custodian agency for the global monitoring of progress. The Council further urged that the 
mechanism involve and support countries in the data collection and reporting on SDG Indicator 
16.10.2.  
                                                           
9 The IAEG -SDGs developed a system of tiers, or levels, to classify each SDG indicator based on its methodological 
development and the availability of data at the global level. The tier -system helps monitor the quality and availability of data, 
allowing for better understanding and addressing the gaps in achieving the SDGs. Tier 1 indicators are those with an 
internationally established methodology and standards, and where data are regularly produced by countries for at least 50 
per cent  of countries and of the population in every region where the indicator is relevant. Meanwhile, Indicators in Tier 2 
are those with an internationally established methodology and standards are available, but data are not regularly produced.  
10 https://en.unesco.org/news/ipdc -council -encourages -further -development -mechanism -monitor -and-report -access -
information   
 8 
 As a response to the Decision, UNESCO and its Insti tute for Statistics (UIS) developed a 
methodology to help measure and report on Indicator 16.10.2. This consists of a survey 
developed in consultation11  with experts, concerned organizations, and the IFAP Secretariat. 
The survey was piloted in 2019  in 43 countries, with the findings presented the same year at 
a side -event during the UN’s High -Level Political Forum. The instrument was th en further 
refined for a full deployment in 2020  and will be further refined on the basis of this experience. 
The Secretariat is currently working with the UIS and the IAEG -SDGs to ensure that the 
updated version of the survey is reflected within the metadata.  
In the same 2018 IPDC Decision, the IPDC Se cretariat, Council and Bureau were also 
encouraged to keep supporting Member States in data -collection and reporting on SDG 
indicator 16.10.2. In this regard, with the support of various donors to IPDC, UNESCO has 
been able to facilitate capacity developme nt initiatives and awareness -raising efforts in several 
countries, such as Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, Indonesia, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, 
Rwanda, Senegal, and Tunisia as well as in the Latin America  region . This line of action has 
been done through  collaboration with information commissioners and their networks. In this 
way for instance, during the 11th International Conference of Information Commissioners held 
in Johannesburg, South Africa, around 50 representatives from ATI oversight bodies and Civil 
Society Organisations (CSOs ) have improved their capacity in monitoring and reporting on 
Indicator 16.10.2 and in contextualizing the  significance of their work in the wider framework 
of the SDGs.12  
The IPDC Council, in the 2018 Decision, also encouraged countries to monitor progress on 
ATI, including through the Voluntary National Reviews (VNR) system, which offers a tool for 
the follo w-up and review mechanisms on SDG 16 (Section 4 of this report further discusses 
the VNRs). In this regard, participating in the UNESCO survey on Indicator 16.10.2 has been 
proven to be useful for countries  as they can repurpose the data submitted to the s urvey for 
their VNRs. Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, and Tunisia, for example, used the data collected for the 
UNESCO survey in the preparation of their VNRs in 2019.  
UNESCO has also been engaged in various joint efforts with other UN entities and civil society. 
Under the umbrella of the Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just and 
Inclusive Societies13, collaboration has been established through a series of events organised 
ahead of and during the UN High -Level Political Forum on the Sustainable Development. The 
Alliance has also been working on developing SDG -related guidelines and resources to 
support c ountries in their monitoring and reporting. In 2020, the Alliance’s partnership 
continues with the “SDG 16 National Monitoring Initiative” – a project on monitoring national 
progress on Goal 16 that is being planned in 16 countries.14 
                                                           
11https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco -convenes -experts -advance -monitoring -and-reporting -access -information   
12 https://en.unesco.org/news/information -commissioners -key-successful -monitoring -and-reporting -sdg-16102   
13 The Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just and  Inclusive Societies ( https://www.un -globalalliance.org/ ) is 
a coordinating platform for Member States, private sector, civil society and UN entities to work together for SDG16+. The 
Alliance is operated by 7 Member States (Cabo Verde, Mexico, Norway, Qatar, Sierra Leone, Tunisia, and the United Kingdom), 
3 CSOs (NYU Centre on International Co operation, Transparency and Accountability Network, and World Federation of United 
Nations Associations), and 3 businesses (Deloitte Ltd., LexisNexis, and White & Case LLP). Its work is supported by a Secreta riat 
co-facilitated by UNDP, UNODC, UNESCO, OHCH R, UNHCR, UN -Women, and the Global Compact (a UN Advisory Group 
composed of 10 UN Agencies, and partners from other governments, CSOs and business).  
14 Argentina, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Colombia, El Salvador, Georgia, Indonesia,  Lebanon, 
Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, South Africa, Timor -Leste, Tunisia, and Uruguay.  9 
  
 
Figure 1. Flowchar t of data collection and reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2  
  
2. Tracking progress on the adoption of ATI guarantees   
A. Global and regional overview  
Progress has been recorded in terms of binding laws and policies giving individuals a right to 
access information held by public authorities. As of July 2020, 127 UN Member States have 
adopted constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information, with 
at least 19 countries adopting such guarantees since the 2030 Agenda in 201 5.15  
 
Table 1. Regional aggregates of UN Member States that have adopted constitutional, 
statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information (grouped based on 
the execution of regional activities by UNESCO)  
Europe and North America ( 49) 
1. Albania  
2. Azerbaijan  
3. Austria  
4. Armenia  
5. Belgium  
6. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  
7. Bulgaria  11. Czechia  
12. Denmark  
13. Estonia  
14. Finland  
15. France  
16. Georgia  
17. Germany  
18. Greece  22. Israel16 
23. Italy 
24. Latvia  
25. Liechtenstein17 
26. Lithuania  
27. Luxembourg  
28. Malta  
29. Monaco  33. Norway  
34. Poland  
35. Portugal  
36. Republic of 
Moldova  
37. Romania  
38. Russian 
Federation  44. Sweden  
45. Switzerland  
46. Turkey  
47. Ukraine  
48. United 
Kingdom of 
Great 
Britain and 
                                                           
15 Argentina, Bahamas, Sri Lanka, Cyprus, Fiji, Ghana, Kenya, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malawi, Morocco, Vanuatu  
Philippines, Timor -Leste, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Seychelles, Vi et Nam, Togo, United Republic of Tanzania.  
16 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018.   
17 Lichtenstein is not a member of UNESCO  
 
10 
 8. Canada  
9. Croatia  
10. Cyprus  
 19. Hungary  
20. Iceland  
21. Ireland  
 30. Montenegro  
31. Netherlands  
32. North 
Macedonia  
 39. San Marino  
40. Serbia  
41. Slovakia  
42. Slovenia  
43. Spain  
 Northern 
Ireland  
49. United 
States of  
America18 
Latin America and the Caribbean (24)  
1. Antigua and 
Barbuda  
2. Argentina  
3. Bahamas  
4. Belize  
5. Bolivia 
(Plurinational 
State of)  6. Brazil  
7. Chile  
8. Colombia  
9. Dominican 
Republic  
 10. Ecuador  
11. El Salvador  
12. Guatemala  
13. Guyana  
14. Honduras  
15. Jamaica  
 16. Mexico  
17. Nicaragua  
18. Panama  
19. Paraguay  
20. Peru  
21. Saint Kitts 
and Nevis  22. Saint 
Vincent 
and the 
Grenadines  
23. Trinidad 
and 
Tobago  
24. Uruguay  
Asia and the Pacific (2 7) 
1. Afghanistan  
2. Australia  
3. Bangladesh  
4. China  
5. Cook Islands  6. Fiji  
7. India  
8. Indonesia  
9. Iran 
(Islamic 
Republic 
of) 
 10. Japan  
11. Kazakhstan  
12. Kyrgyzstan  
13. Maldives  
14. Mongolia  
15. Nepal  
 16. New 
Zealand  
17. Pakistan  
18. Palau  
19. Philippines  
20. Republic of 
Korea  21. Sri Lanka  
22. Tajikistan  
23. Thailand  
24. Timor -
Leste  
25. Uzbekistan  
26. Vanuatu  
27. Viet Nam  
 
Africa (2 1) 
1. Angola  
2. Benin  
3. Burkina Faso  
4. Côte d'Ivoire  5. Ethiopia  
6. Ghana  
7. Kenya  
8. Liberia  
 9. Malawi  
10. Mozambique  
11. Niger  
12. Nigeria  
13. Rwanda  
 14. Seychelles  
15. Sierra 
Leone  
16. South 
Africa  
17. South 
Sudan  18. Togo  
19. Uganda  
20. United 
Republic of 
Tanzania  
21. Zimbabwe  
Arab States ( 6) 
1. Jordan  
2. Lebanon  3. Morocco  
4. Sudan  
 5. Tunisi a 
6. Yemen    
 
 
B. Leaving No One Behind: Inclusion of disability rights in ATI guarantees  
 
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, pledging to “leave no one behind,” calls upon 
countries to ensure the full and equal participation of persons with disabilities in all spheres of 
society and create enabling environments by, for and with persons  with disabilities, in 
accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights of Pe rsons with Disabilities  (CRPD).  
The CRPD recognises that civil and political rights, including the right to information, are a vital 
prerequisite for persons with disabilities to overcome histories of exclusion.  Article 21 on 
Freedom of expression and opi nion, and access to information explicitly states that States 
Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that persons with disabilities can exercise 
                                                           
18 United States of America withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018.   11 
 the right to freedom of expression and opinion, including the freedom to seek, receive and 
impar t information and ideas on an equal basis with others and through all forms of 
communication of their choice.  
ATI laws in several countries acknowledge the importance of accessibility to information by 
persons with disabilities. Out of 127 countries with A TI laws, 64% include formal provisions 
that accommodate persons with disabilities when requesting information, such as:   
i. providing appropriate forms of assistance and support to persons with disabilities to 
ensure their access to information (in line with  Article 9 of the CRPD); and  
ii. presenting information in accessible or usable formats for persons with disabilities (in 
accordance with Article 21 of the CRPD).  
 
Table 2. Range of inclusion of disability issues in ATI laws in various countries  
Element  Type  Country  
Making 
requests  
 Assistance by public information 
officer (PIO) in writing down oral 
requests and providing a 
copy/record to the applicant.  
  Afghanistan , Antigua , Azerbaijan, 
Ethiopia , Ghana , Greece , India , 
Kenya , Maldives , Nepal , Nigeria , 
Sierra Leone, South Africa , Sri 
Lanka , Sudan , Tanzania.  
Involvement of a third party to 
obtain the information on behalf of 
the requestor  
 Malawi.  
  
Clear explanation on the 
procedures and conditions  
  Armenia , Estonia , Viet Nam , Yemen.  
 
General assistance to enable a 
requester to access such 
information (with no specific 
details)  Australia , Bangladesh , Belize,  
Bosnia and Herzegovina , Cook 
Islands , Croatia , Cyprus ,  
El Salvador,  Estonia , Fiji, Finland , 
Guyana , Ireland , Italy, Kazakhstan , 
Liberia , Malta , Mozambique , 
Pakistan, Sweden , Switzerland , 
Tunisia.  
 
Releasing 
information  Provision of copy of record in an 
alternative format, or other 
assistance that may require to 
access the information given.  
 Brazil , Burkina Faso , Canada , 
Colombia , India , Malawi, Mexico, 
Montenegro, Nicaragua , Vanuatu , 
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.  
 
While promoting ATI norms and standards that are inclusive of persons with disabilities is key, 
putting them into practice is equally important to guarantee their effectiveness. In this regard, 
the monitoring of Indicator 16.10.2 provides an opportunity for countries and other concerned 
stakeholders to improve actual implementation of the  provisions of normative instruments such 
as the CRPD .  
 
 12 
 3. Tracking progress on the implementation of ATI  guarantees: highlights from 
the UNESCO 2020 Survey on SDG Indicator 16.10.2  
 
A. Overview  
In 2020, UNESCO invited all UN Member States, including associated territories, to participate 
in the survey based upon on SDG Indicator 16.10.2. The survey took place between February 
and June 2020. In spite of deadline extensions to address the impact of  the COVID -19 
pandemic, the survey received a limited number of responses.  A number of SDG monitoring 
bodies lacked links with the ATI oversight institutions holding the data which curtailed their 
ability to respond.  
The pandemic further highlighted the need to collect more focused and essential data, taking 
into consideration the capacity of local actors on the ground in this period. The survey initially 
consisted of a National Questionnaire (targeted at ATI oversight bodies) and an Institutional 
Questio nnaire (targeted at three public authorities19). However, in view of COVID -19, UNESCO 
put the focus on the National Questionnaire and responses from ATI oversight bodies as the 
main data holders in many countries. This helped to secure the participation of 69 countries 
and associated territories, a significant increase from 29 countries that submitted responses 
during early phase of the survey in April 2020.  
Table 3. UN Member States* (including territories)20 that responded to UNESCO 2020 
Survey on SDG Indi cator 16.10.2 (grouped according to the execution of regional 
activities by UNESCO)  
 
 = Countries (including territories) that have adopted Access to Information (ATI) 
guarantees  
Europe & North America  (23) 
Albania  Gibraltar (territory of United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland)21  Portugal  
Armenia  Hungary  Romania  
Belgium  Ireland  Serbia  
Croatia  Isle of Man (territory of United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland)22  Slovenia  
Cyprus  Israel**  Spain  
                                                           
19 UNESCO ’s survey on SDG Indicator 16.10.2. was designed to measure ATI progress by assessing the “systemic 
performance” of ATI oversight bodies, and the “direct performance” of public authorities that receive requests for 
information from the public. The Ministries of Environment and Finance have been chosen as the main public authorities to 
respond the survey due to their direct relevance to the 2030. The third authority, the National Capital, was chosen due to 
their direct relevance to the UN Urban Agenda where it says that as much as 65% of the SDG a genda may not be fully 
achieved without the involvement of cities.  
20 The territories responding to the survey were: Gibraltar, Isle of Man, Jersey and Cayman Islands, that are territories 
depended on the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . 
21 Gibraltar is a non -self-governing territory administrated by the United Kingdom . 
22 The Isle of Man is an internally self -governing dependency of the British Crown, United Kingdom .  
 13 
 Czechia  Jersey (territory of United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland)23  Switzerland  
Estonia  Latvia  United States of America  
**  
France  North Macedonia   
Latin America & the Caribbean (17)   
Argentina  Dominican Republic  Mexico  
Brazil  Ecuador  Panama  
Cayman Islands (territory of 
United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland)24 
 El Salvador  Paraguay  
Chile  Guatemala  Peru  
Colombia  Honduras  Uruguay  
Costa Rica  Jamaica   
Asia and the Pacific (18)  
Afghanistan  Kyrgyzstan  Republic of Korea  
Australia  Myanmar  Samoa  
Bangladesh  Nepal  Singapore  
China New Zealand  Thailand  
Cook Islands  Palau  Turkey  
Indonesia  Philippines  Uzbekistan  
Africa ( 9) 
Côte d’Ivoire  Kenya  Sierra Leone  
Democratic Republic of Congo  Liberia  South Africa  
Gambia  Madagascar  South Sudan  
Arab States ( 2) 
Jordan  Tunisia   
Total responding countries 
and territories  69 
The number of which 
adopted Access to 
Information (ATI) guarantees  62 
Percentage: 89.85%  
 
* United States of America and Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018  
B. Key findings   
1. National regulation systems are increasingly conducive to public access to 
information  
The right to access to information can be enshrined in a constitution and further regulated in a 
dedicated policy and/or a law on right to information that could ensure its effectiveness.  
From the 69 countries and associated territories responding to the UNESCO survey, 89.85% 
(62) reported to have constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for ATI. Two countries 
                                                           
23 Jersey is an internally self -governing dependency of the British Crown, United Kingdom . 
24 Cayman Islands is a non -self-governing territory administrated by  the United Kingdom.  14 
 reported an absence of any ATI guarantees, and five others reported tha t such guarantees are 
still ‘in progress’.  
Out of the 62 countries and associated territories with guarantees for ATI, 49 – or 79% – 
reported that their laws contained a specific provision to mandate public bodies to 
proactively disclose information , while one country reported that a lack thereof. The 
remaining 12 did not provide a response.  
Such an obligation for public bodies to proactively disclose information has several positive 
effects. For example, it minimises the time, money and effort required by the public to access 
information. It also reduces the nu mber of requests that these bodies must process, thereby 
easing the administrative burden on government of implementing ATI laws. Where this is 
automated, such as with procurement data, difficulties such as those related to human 
resources in the COVID -19 period, can be mitigated.25 
A total of 45 out of the 62 respondents indicated in the survey that they are members of the 
Open Government Partnerships (OGP).26 Some have adopted commitments for 
implementing or strengthening the operation of their ATI legislat ion as part of their OGP 
national action plans. A number of OGP non -member countries also reported that they adopted 
some form of open government declaration or plan.27  
 
2. Dedicated ATI oversight bodies are well established in most countries, but 
more precision is needed with regard to their different functions  
Oversight mechanisms refer to the process of supervision, monitoring and evaluation of 
performance to ensure compl iance with ATI legislation. In the context of ATI implementation, 
while some countries have a specialised body (i.e. focusing only on ATI), others have a multi -
purpose body (i.e. an ombudsman or a human rights commission, which also performs various 
functi ons).   
Out of the 62 countries and territories with ATI legislation responding to the UNESCO survey, 
49 reported on the type of ATI oversight body . Several responding countries and territories 
reported more than one body responsible for overseeing the ATI  regime. For instance, Albania, 
Argentina, Australia and Estonia reported an Information Commission and a Data Protection 
or Privacy Commission/er, while Bangladesh reported a Ministry and an Information 
Commission. A total of 30 responding countries and t erritories selected two or more types of 
oversight bodies in response to this specific question. Further analysis is therefore required on 
the specific functions performed by each of them within a country.  
 
 
 
                                                           
25 See the 2020 UNESCO issue brief in the series World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media 
Development:  “ The right to information in times of crisis: access to information – saving lives, building trust, 
bringing hope! ” https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374369   
26 The Open Government Partnership is a multilateral initiative overseeing by a steering committee including 
representatives of governments and CSO s. It aims at promoting open government, empowering citizens, fighting corruption 
and harnessing new technologies to strengthen governance.  
27 This list includes, among others, Bangladesh, China, Gambia, Madagascar, and Switzerland.  
 15 
  
The predominant ATI oversight body reported w as an information commission/ commissioner 
(34)28, followed by data protection or privacy commission/commissioner (21), then a specific 
department/ ministry or agency (19), an ombudsman institution (16), a human rights 
commission (12), and other (7).  
 
Figure 2. Types of ATI Oversight Bodies  
Regardless of the type of ATI oversight bodies, the top three  activities  reported were to 
provide implementation guidance (77%); to provide comments on compatibility of draft 
legislation with the ATI law (74  %) and t o publish an annual report (74%). It is worth noting that 
a few countries and territories responded to this question for more than one ATI oversight body.  
 
                                                           
28 While not formally called as ‘information commission’, among the 6 responses from Latin America and the Caribbean 
region , the Agencia de Acceso a la Información Pública (AAIP) from Argentina, the Instituto de Acceso a la Información 
Pública (IAIP) from Honduras, the Instituto Nacional de Transparencia, Acceso a la Información y Protección de Datos 
Personales (INAI) in Mexic o, and the Autoridad Nacional de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información Pública (ANTAIP) from 
Peru were included. Ecuador and Paraguay also have  ATI under  Ombudsman and the Ministry of Justice respectively. The 
Instituto de Acceso a la Información Pública  from El Salvador performs similar functions of an ATI commission –as in 
Honduras, so consistency in the reporting of the type of ATI oversight body is required. Chile has the Secretaria General de 
la Presidencia (a Ministry) or the Consejo para la Transpa rencia (an Information Commission).  
 31%
3420%
2110%
1214%
1617%
197%
7
Information
CommissionData protection
or privacy
CommissionHuman Rights
CommissionOmbudsman Department /
Ministry /
AgencyOther
77,14%
5572,86%
5270%
5074,29%
5374,29%
5362,86%
45
Provide
implementation
guidanceOffer training to
officialsRaise public
awarenessGive comments
on compatibility
of draft
legislation with
ATI law -Publish an
annual reportRequire public
authorities to
create records of
their activities
and decisions16 
 Figure 3. Types of activities performed by ATI Oversight Bodies  
3. Appeals mechanisms with binding power exist in most countries, but data on 
appeals are still not available in many countries     
Distinct from the oversight function, the appeals function deals with reviewing requests to 
reconsider decisions relating to re fusal of information disclosure. 29 In some countries, the 
same ATI oversight body is also tasked with processing appeals, while in other countries this 
is done by a separate body.  The issue of further appeal through a judicial system is not 
considered in this report.  
Out of the 62 countries and territories with ATI legislation responding to the UNESCO survey, 
48 reported on the type of ATI appeals body . The predominant ATI appeals body reported 
was an information commission or commissioner (35), followed b y a data protection or privacy 
commission/  commissioner (16), a specific department, ministry or agency (12), an Ombud 
institution (11), a human rights commission (6), and others (6)30. A few responding countries 
or territories selected more than one option  in terms of ATI appeals bodies.31  
The UNESCO survey also looked at whether or not the decisions of the ATI appeals bodies 
are binding . Established international standards in ATI provisions have called for granting ATI 
oversight bodies with binding decisio n power. One main argument is that such power gives the 
body the ability to force disclosure of information when public authorities may be slow or 
reluctant to do so. Equally important, this can allow legal precedents to which the public 
authorities and ov ersight body staff can refer when dealing with similar requests and appeals.  
The survey revealed that out of the 35 countries and territories that indicated  an information 
commission as an appeals body, 25 (71%) reported that the body makes binding decisions, 
while 8 (23%) lack such prerogative and 2 (6%) did not provide a response. The chart below 
shows the binding power of different type of appeals bodies.   
 
 
                                                           
29 An appeal that is filed within the public authority itself, it is known as an “internal appeal”. In the case where an appeal is 
filed  with an ATI body , it is also called an “e xternal appeal ”, since it is lodged outsid e of the public authority  (i.e. a 
ministr y/department ) which originally receive s the  RTI request. The issue at stake here is whether the body receiving an 
“external appeal” can make decisions that bind the entity whose initial decision/s are being appealed .   
30  Among the ‘Other’ responses : the Access to Information Appeals Tribunal, the Transparency and Access to Information 
Tribunal from Peru and CMRI in Brazil.  
31 For instance, Brazil reported an ombuds institution (the Ouvidoria) within the Comptroller G eneral Office and the Joint 
Information Re -evaluation Commission (Comissao Mista de Reavaliacao de Informacoes - CMRI).  71%88%
67%73% 75%100%
23%
6%17% 18% 17%
0%6% 6%17%9% 8%0%
Information
CommissionData protection or
privacy
CommissionHuman Rights
CommissionOmbudsman Department /
Ministry / AgencyOther
Yes No No answer17 
 Figure 4 . Binding power with regard to decisions made by different ATI Appeals 
Bodies  
 
With respect to the number of  appeals  received, only 29 countries and territories reported on 
this question. Of the 29 countries, Asia and the Pacific reported 6,158 appeals, while Europe 
and North America reported 4,794 appeals. In Latin America and the Caribbean, 2,121 appeals 
were reported . Africa recorded 148 appeals, while the Arab States recorded 6 appeals.  
Concerning the number of external appeals granted – either partially or fully, as well as 
dismissed, there is an important caveat to be made. In a couple of cases, countries indicated  
that data on appeals relate only to formal decisions made by the ATI appeals body. Yet, most 
appeals received by these ATI appeals bodies were resolved through other means – for 
instance, through mediation. Therefore, they did not result in a formal decis ion by the ATI 
appeals body, and this was not captured as a granted appeal in its statistical data. In one case, 
it was also noted that a few appeals were finally settled, withdrawn or discontinued during the 
review process.  
 
4. Much needs to be done by ATI oversight bodies to improve good records of the 
requests they receive and how they are processed  
Out of the 62 responding countries and territories with ATI legislation, 40 responded to the 
question on the number of requests  filed, granted and denied. However, not all of them 
provided data for all elements of this question, for instance, the number of requests denied. 
Several countries and territories also reported that data is not collected or available centrally. 
This mirro rs findings from 2019, and also raises a question about data informing annual reports 
where these are published.  
A few others made a disclaimer that the information provided is partial statistical data, which 
do not cover all public institutions mandated by the ATI law in the respective country.  
With regard to disclosure and refusal of information , only a few responding countries and 
territories provided all data required.32 In some cases, some countries also reported that all 
requests received were disclos ed, which raises questions about the accuracy of data, as there 
is usually a number of requests which are dismissed as they are incomplete or do not fall into 
an ATI request, or there are even a few requests carried over from the previous year or into 
the next year.  
From 19 out of the 62 countries and territories that responded to the question on reasons for 
non-disclosure of information, the category of “Others” received the highest answer. This might 
indicate different categories used in some cases, which  do not fall under those listed in the 
survey.33   
                                                           
32 Australia, Brazil, Cayman Islands, Croatia, Ireland, Israel, Republic of Korea  
33 For example the documents requested were not in possession  or do not exist (Jamaica) or the requests were vexatious 
(Brazil) .  18 
  
Figure 5 . Reasons for non -disclosure of information  
In terms of the average time to respond to information requests, 74% of 51 responding 
countries and territories reported that information requests were responded between 1 to 30 
days. The other 8% reported that it takes between 31 to 60 days, and 2% reported more than 
60 days. The rest indicated  that data were not available. Further analysis would be needed on 
whether the responses are in accordance to the statutory time limit stipulated in their respective 
ATI legislation.  
 
 
Figure 6. Average time respond RTI requests  
 
4. ATI reporting in the Vol untary National Reviews  
 
As part of its follow -up and review mechanisms, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
encourages countries to "conduct regular and inclusive reviews of progress at the national and 
sub-national levels, which are country -led a nd country -driven". These reviews, called 
Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs)34, are expected to serve as a basis for the regular reviews 
                                                           
34 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/vnrs/   
 1,15%6,11%2,58%90,16%
2,52%20,79%13,36%63,32%
National Security Privacy concerns Commercial confidentiality Other
Partial disclosure Non-disclosure
74,00%
8,00%
2,00%16,00%
1-30 days 31-60 days More than 60 days Data no available19 
 by the UN High -level Political Forum (HLPF) on Sustainable Development, an annual meeting 
under the auspices of Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).35  
The VNRs are voluntary, state -led, conducted by both developed and developing countries, 
and involve a wide range of stakeholders, including civil society. The VNRs work to facilitate 
the sharing of experiences and t o provide governments and other stakeholders with an 
opportunity to critically assess the country´s development patterns  to accelerate the 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The reviews also seek to 
strengthen policies and insti tutions of governments and to mobilise multi -stakeholder support 
and partnerships for the implementation of the SDGs.  
In 2019 – for the first time since the 2030 Agenda’s adoption – SDG 16, among others, was 
subjected to a detailed review. During that yea r, 28 of the 47 countries submitting VNRs (59.5%) 
reported on ‘access to information’. Of these 28 countries, 21 have a specific ATI law for public 
access to information.36 
In 2020, 18 out of 47 VNR countries (38.3%) addressed ‘access to information’ in the ir reports. 
This might be seen as a decrease when compared to 2019, but it is worth noting that no specific 
SDG was specified for a detailed in review in 2020. Hence, the fact that ‘access to information’ 
was included by these countries in their reports de monstrates their recognition of the 
importance of ATI when it comes to reporting overall SDG progress.  
Closely linked to this, the table below shows that although some countries have not yet adopted 
a specific ATI law for public access to information, the y still reported progress on ATI in other 
contexts. Gambia, for example, reported that the draft constitution for ATI is in a process to be 
ratified, and included progress in relation to Target 9.c on universal access to information and 
communication techn ology. Similarly, Micronesia also reported on ATI progress in relation to 
Target 9.c. Cameroon saw the value of access to information in promoting social inclusion of 
vulnerable people.  
 
Table 4. UN Member States’ Reporting on “Access to Information” in the VNRs (2019 -
2010)  
Country  Year of 
VNRs  Adopted a specific 
ATI law for public 
access to 
information  Reported on 
“Adoption of 
ATI 
guarantees”  Reported on 
“ATI 
Implementation”  
Algeria  2019     
Argentina  2020     
Austria  2020     
Azerbaijan  2019     
Bangladesh  2020     
Bulgaria  2020     
Cameroon  2019    * 
Chad  2019     
Chile  2019     
Côte d'Ivoire  2019     
                                                           
35 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/hlpf   
36 Powering sustainable development with access to information: highlights from the 2019 UNESCO monitoring and 
reporting of SDG indicator 16.10.2: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000369160?posInSet=2&queryId=6d5dfcc0 -
142b -46ec -a3c9 -6112fc055d6a  20 
 Congo (Republic 
of the)  2019    * 
Croatia  2019     
Ecuador  2020     
Gambia  2020     
Ghana  2019     
Guyana  2019     
Iceland  2019     
Indonesia  2019     
Israel37 2019     
Kenya  2020     
Kuwait  2019     
Kyrgyzstan  2020     
Lesotho  2019    * 
Malawi  2020     
Mauritius  2019    * 
Micronesia 
(Federated 
States of)  2020    * 
Mongolia  2019     
Morocco  2020     
New Zealand  2019     
North Macedonia  2020     
Palau  2019     
Panama  2020     
Papua New 
Guinea  2020     
Peru  2020     
Philippines  2019     
Republic of 
Moldova  2020     
Rwanda  2019     
Seychelles  2020     
South Africa  2019     
Timor -Leste  2019    * 
Tunisia  2019     
Turkey  2019     
United Kingdom 
of Great Britain 
and Northern 
Ireland  2019     
United Republic 
of Tanzania  2019     
Vanuatu  2019     
Zambia  2020     
 
* The implementation aspect reported by these countries is more related to 'access to 
media and ICT’, and other human -rights issues, rather than 'access to information held 
by public authorities'  
 
                                                           
37 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018  21 
 5. Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: Case studi es 
 
A. Latin America and the Caribbean: Regional actions for global goals  
 
The Network for Transparency and Access to Information ( Red de Transparencia y Acceso a 
la Informacion , or RTA) was established in 2011 in the wake of a growing ATI movement in 
the Lat in America and the Caribbean (LAC) region.  
Bringing together state agencies charged with implementing ATI legislation in their countries, 
RTA was formed in response to the demand expressed by several LAC countries to develop 
a consensus about the most effective mechanisms for using ATI to promote good governance 
and mitigate corruption.38 Today, RTA has 32 member institutions belonging to 17 Latin 
American countries and Spain39, one international foundation40, a federal network of Argentina 
and two interna tional organizations41. 
Some of RTA’s joint actions have been realised through the “Transparency measurement 
project in Latin America and Spain” project 42, built on the following three dimensions:  
1. Resources, which refers to indicators that measure the reco gnition and guarantee of 
the right of access to information;  
2. Processes, which refers to indicators that measure the level of inclusion and 
performance of duties by the guarantor bodies and other entities that can fulfil 
transparency functions, and  
3. Result s, which refers to indicators that measure results in the implementation of 
transparency policies and the right of access to information.  
The project also established best practices based on peer -to-peer learning such as a model 
for the international measu rement of transparency; a model for document management and 
archives administration; a model for applying the gender approach to transparency and 
information access policies; and the version 2.0 of the Framework Law on Access to 
Information of the Organiza tion of American States.   
As part of its support to the SDGs, RTA adopted the declaration “Transparency and its Role in 
Latin American Region’s Democratic Life” during its XVIII Assembly’s Meeting in Mexico City 
on 12 November 201943, emphasizing the follo wing44:  
1. “That the guarantee of access to public information is an essential pillar in a democratic 
State, which encourages social comptrollership, accountability, and the promotion of 
citizen engagement to conduct a good governance.  
                                                           
38 The RTA was established with support from the World Bank Group:  
https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2013/12/17/a -regional -network -of-access -to-information -practitioners -in-latin -
america  
39 One institution from Spain and 16 from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Honduras, Mexi co, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Dominican Republic, Uruguay.  
40 International and Ibero -American Foundation for Administration and Public Policies . 
41 The World Bank and the Organization of American States  
42 The project has been supported by EUROsociAL, the Eur opean Union Regional Programme for social cohesion in Latin 
America.  
43 Adopted on that date by 22 ATI oversight bodies and two international organizations from 16 LAC countries.  
44 As quoted from the official document received by UNESCO from the RTA  Secretariat.  22 
 2. That the access to publ ic information is critical to attain the Sustainable Development 
Goal 16 and that it strengthens the fulfilment of other Goals set in the UN 2030 Agenda.  
3. That the access to information oversight bodies’ work is vital in the democratic life of a 
country, du e to their role as a regulatory element and as a balance to the powers of the 
State.  
4. That is critical that the States have access to information guaranteeing and 
transparency -promoting bodies, provided with independence and resources that 
facilitate publi c management opening, in order to strengthen citizen confidence in 
institutions.  
5. That governments of the region are urged to support access to information and 
transparency specialised bodies, and to consolidate public policies that may encourage 
participa tory democracy through the effective exercise of this right of citizens.”  
RTA has also been supportive of UNESO’s work on ATI, including in the development of 
UNESCO’s survey methodology for Indicator 16.10.2 and in mobilising its members to monitor 
ATI im plementation through participating in the survey.   
RTA could therefore serve as a model of formal regional cooperation among ATI oversight 
bodies, where capacities of the members are strengthened through synergis ed actions, 
contributing to improvements at the national level, while building trust, reducing disparities and 
increasing cohesion at the regional level – as aspired to by SDG Target 17.16: Enhance the 
global partnership for sustainable development.  
 
B. Sri Lanka: Promoting transparency across SDGs through Access to 
Information45 
 
Sri Lanka’s Right to Information (RTI) Act, No. 12 of 2016, was enacted on 3 February 2017 
to give effect to a constitutional right to information contained in Article 14A of the  19th 
Amendment to the Constitution of Sri Lanka. During the first three years of its implementation, 
the RTI Act has made inroads into rendering governance open and transparent , “significantly 
                                                           
45 Findings in this section are extracted from  a study commissioned by UNESCO’s IPDC  to independent researcher Ashwini 
Natesan with guidance and expert input by Sri Lanka RTI  Commissioner Kishali Pinto -Jayawarden a. For the purpose of this 
Report, only the most relevant findings are presented.   
   
SDG 17:  
Partnerships for 
the Goals  
“Strengthen the 
means of 
implementation 
and revitalize the 
global partnership 
for sustainable 
development.”     
Target 17.16: Enhance the global 
partnership for sustainable 
development  
“Enhance the Global Partnership for 
Sustainable Development, complemented 
by multi -stakeholder partnerships that 
mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, 
technology and financial resources, to 
support the achievement  of the 
Sustainable Development Goals in all 
countries, in particular developing 
countries.”  
 
23 
 altering the relationship between the citizen and the State”46 and, to some extent, giving ways 
to increased transparency and accountability.  
Within this context, a study was commissioned with the support of IPDC funds to analyse the 
use of the right to information vis -à-vis its impact on transparency and decrease of  corruption 
in Sri Lanka, as well as how ATI contributes to the achievement of the SDGs in the country.  
The study examined both the demand side (RTI requests filed by citizens and CSOs) and the 
supply side (responsiveness and attitude of public authorities and the Information Commission 
of Sri Lanka). It analysed data from publicly available sources47 and sel ected CSOs48, along 
with orders (decisions of appeals) from the Commission – all between 2017 and 2019.  
Several findings can be noted from this study:  
B.1 Information related to SDG 16 is the most requested, underscoring the 
public’s call for good governance  
For the purpose of this study, data related to RTI requests were categorised according to the 
following SDG themes49:   
• Employment/ labour rights an d welfare benefits (Goal 1, Goal 8);  
• Infrastructure and construction (Goal 9);  
• Public utility services (Goal 6, 9, 12)  
• Land and agriculture (Goal 1 and 15)  
• Education (Goal 4);  
• Health (Goal 2, 3 and 6);  
• Environment (Goal 13, 14, 15);  
• Public procurement (Go al 12);  
• Just, peaceful and inclusive society and institutional transparency (Goal 16).  
The study found that the majority of RTI requests fall under the category of “Just, peaceful and 
inclusive society and institutional transparency” (1,475), followed with  “Employment/ labour 
rights and welfare benefits” (1,199) and “Infrastructure and construction” (851).  
 
Figure 7. Number of RTI requests in per SDG themes  
                                                           
46 “Legitimate information and the public interest override’ - critical analysis of selected decisions of the right to 
information comm ission during 2017 -2019” by J. De A. Guneratne.  
47 News reports gleaned from mainstream media reports, social media reports, videos, twitter and Facebook feeds. A total 
of 300 stories were included  in the analysis . 
48 The CSOs that were included  in the main analysis of this study were Centre for Policy Alternative, Outreach Unit; The 
Social Architects; Transparency International Sri Lanka; and Sri Lanka Press Institute.  
49 The tabulations  included overlaps , where the  same request s/order s were  listed under  more than one SDG theme . Such 
overlaps aimed to ensure that any RTI requests were  not artificially restricted to one SDG theme  only.  1199
851
365698
204105 158131475Employment /
labour rights and
welfare benefits
Infrastructure &
constructions
Public utility
services
Agriculture & Land
Education
Health
Environment
Public Procurement
Just, peaceful and
inclusive society&
Institutional…24 
 According to the study, CSOs and citizens have used the RTI Act to inquire into varied issues 
such as payments under the Samurdhi Poverty Alleviation Programme, construction of roads, 
progress and finances surrounding various development projects in their respective areas. 
There are also cases of the use of RTI on issues of larger public interest like budgetary 
allocations, and assets declaration concerning ministers.  
 
B.2 A p ositive  trend of information release can be seen in all the SDG themes    
From the  publicly available data, for example, it can be inferred that the majority of cases – 
77% – have resulted in disclosure of information.  
 
 
Figure 8. Disclosure of Information - Publicly available data  
Data from the Information Commission echoed this trend, with information releases being 
granted in 85% of the Commission’s orders. This figure comprised 77% of full release and 8% 
partial release.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Disclosure of Information – Orders from the Information 
Commissioner of Sri Lanka  information 
received and 
received in 
part 
85%information 
rejected
15%Information 
Received
77%Information 
Not Receieved
8%Partly received
3%No Response
2%
Issue  
resolved 
10%25 
 Meanwhile, data from CSOs showed an average of 51% of information disclosure across all 
SDG themes. This trend, however, might increase since the figure did not include requests 
that were still being processed at t he time the study was conducted.  
 
B.3 Public authorities at provincial and district levels tend to be more responsive  
Data from the CSOs revealed that the average percentage of information release made by 
public authorities at provincial level is 54%, followed with 52% at the district level, and 45% at 
the central level. Additionally, data from the Information Commission showed that most 
appeals were made against public authorities at the central level (783 appeals). As a 
comparison, 259 appeals were filed against public authorities at the province level and 142 at 
the district level.  
 
B.4 The role of an independent Infor mation Commission is central in developing an 
RTI regime  
The establishment of the Information Commission of Sri Lanka, as the substantive body 
advocating for standards and best practices, has  increased transparency. Of 84% of its 1,177 
orders, the Commiss ion has ruled in favour of disclosure of information, with 74% being 
granted fully. It is worth noting that public authorities have complied with the Commission’s 
orders. In the 16% of appeals that were rejected (including partially), most were decided on 
the basis of statutory exemptions as per the RTI Act (45%), while the rest were on grounds 
that information requested was not in possession of the public authorities (42%) and due to 
procedural irregularities (13%).  
 
  
Using Access to Information for gender empowerment in Sri Lanka  
 
The study in Sri Lanka also found that in certain districts, women RTI 
applicants outnumbered the men.50 There is also some empirical evidence 
as to how women played an activist role in many areas, including in the east 
and north of Sri Lanka.  
 
In a particularly striking example, rural women organised in the area of Kilinochchi in the 
Northern Province to c onsistently file RTI requests to the local hospital asking about the 
insufficiency of trained medical personnel in the hospital despite financial allocations. This 
led to the quality of health care being improved. In another case, a community of women 
from the North used the RTI Act to challenge the building of telecommunication towers on 
their land and succeeded in halting the process. Meanwhile, in Ratmalyaya area of 
Puttalam, a water -pipe project was initiated to supply water. Although the pipes had been  
laid, no water supply was provided. A women’s welfare association requested information 
as to the reason for the delay in supplying water.  Although there has been no reported 
progress to date on this effort, the case demonstrates women's interest in exerc ising their 
fundamental right to information . 
                                                           
50 For instance, the data from The Social Architects  showed that in six provinces, 871 women filed RTI requests when  
compared to 570 men. The Women’s Development Centre, Kandy, a CSO focused on the development of women, also 
revealed that women’s group had filed most requests in public utility services concerning issues like broken electric bulbs, 
fixing distribution of  letters, bus fares, public transportation facilities etc.  
26 
 Overall learnings from the Sri Lanka Study  
From the above key findings, the study concluded that the RTI regime has cultivated a 
culture of pro -transparency in Sri Lanka . Information disclosure has not only le d to the mere 
release of information but has also shaped the public’s attitude in asserting accountability in 
governance. The CSOs, whose role also facilitated citizens to file RTI requests, have 
acknowledged that development projects have become more tran sparent and corrupt 
practices have reduced due to the RTI Act . ATI has therefore become a form of activism 
that deepens democratic participation, transparency, accountability and combating corruption. 
Working towards achieving the SDGs and monitoring count ry progress  on that basis has 
also supported and encouraged pro -transparency advocates in their efforts of ensuring more 
transparency and sustainable development.  
Finally, the study confirmed that consorted action needs to be taken at both demand side and  
supply side for there to be impact on transparency and corruption, as showed in Figure 10 
below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Linkages between the use of RTI and increased transparency/reduced 
transparency51 
                                                           
51 Figure adapted from “Transparency in delivery of entitlements through empowered Civil Society Organizations (CSOs): 
The Consortium of Groups for Combating Corruption (CGCC) model in Rajasthan, India”, in Field Actions Science Reports 
[Online], Special Iss ue 11 - 2014 http://journals.openedition.org/factsreports/3551   Transparency / Accountability/ Decreased corruption  
 
Effective policy formation  Effective resolution of appeals  
Policy makers  Institutional measures  
SUPPLY SIDE  
Civil Society Organizations  
Establish local 
resource centres  
Generate 
awareness  Create an enabling 
environment at 
grassroots level  
Empower 
women  
Motivate and assist citizens in filing RTI 
requests, as well as provide moral support  
DEMAND  SIDE  
Enhanced civic engagement  27 
 6. Conclusion  
 
Reporting on SDG 16.10.2 serves as an incentive for countries to improve their legal regulatory 
frameworks, and/or their administration of ATI. In this regard, UNESCO’s survey on SDG 
16.10.2, which provides a standardised approach to monitoring ATI perform ance, has proven 
useful for countries in measuring ATI progress at national level.   
The survey findings in this report suggest that having a  specialised ATI oversight and appeals 
body is fundamental to ensure ATI law enforcement. Experience around the wor ld shows that 
these bodies play key roles in advocating for standards and best practices, as well as helping 
to address problems in ATI implementation.    
The survey also points to good record -keeping as being is vital for ATI oversight and appeals 
bodies.  Without adequate and reliable records of the requests and appeals received and how 
they are processed, it is difficult to produce evidence and measure progress. This is a 
challenge requiring political will, management and resources. Good evidence -based re porting 
can provide many advantages for improving ATI. It can also help ATI bodies in negotiating for 
financial and technical resources with policymakers and other stakeholders, which in turn 
would help address the problems related to management and limite d resources.  
Emerging from the 2020 research process, it is evident that sustainable ATI monitoring and 
reporting requires ATI oversight bodies, when they are the data holder, to play a proactive role 
in collecting relevant SDG data and cooperating closel y with national -level SDG monitoring 
bodies in this regard.  
Civil society organizations and regional and international cooperation networks  – such as the 
International Conference of Information Commissioners (ICIC), the International Ombudsman 
Institute ( IOI); the Open Government Partnership (OGP), and the Regional Network of Access 
to Information Practitioners in Latin America and the Caribbean (Red de Transparencia y 
Acceso a la Informacion, RTA) – have proven to play a significant role in accelerating b oth the 
adoption and the implementation of ATI guarantees.  
As 2020 has also shown, national  and international celebrations can be used as platforms to 
exercise such multi -stakeholder collaboration on ATI, for example during the International Day 
for Unive rsal Access to Information (28 September). The website for the day  highlighted six 
webinars and a high level online event organised by UNESCO headquarters, and more than 
20 national and regional events around the world. International Anti -Corruption Day (9 
December) each year is another opportunity to flag the importance  of ATI and the monitoring 
thereof.  
 
7. Draft Decision  
 
IPDC  Council  Decision  on the  Monitoring  and Reporting of Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG) indicator 16.10.2 (Access to Information)  
The Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC:  
Recalling  the relevance of the Decision on Monitoring SDG indicator 16.10.2 (access to 
information) adopted by the 31st session of the Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC which 
encourages the Secretariat “to develop a mechanism that could involve and support UNES CO 28 
 Member States in data -collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access to 
information”;  
Welcoming  the 2020 UNESCO Report on the Monitoring and Reporting of SDG indicator 
16.10.2 (Access to Information), and recognizing its synergies with the International Day for 
Universal Access to Information and its utility in providing evidence -based analysis for the 
improvement of access to information as a factor for sustainable development;  
Thanking  those Member States that provided information on their  national progress on access 
to information through responding to UNESCO´s 2020 Survey on SDG indicator 16.10.2, 
noting  the positive developments reported therein; and encouraging  additional measures to 
address identified gaps;  
Acknowledging  that the data generated by UNESCO, as custodian agency of Indicator 16.10.2, 
has led to the upgrading of the indicator from Tier II to Tier I status indicator, and encouraging 
continued annual contributions to the global monitoring by the UN Secretary General.  
Appreciat ing those Voluntary National Reports (VNRs) which have included analysis based on 
Indicator 16.10.2, among other data for assessing progress;  
Welcoming  the IPDC Bureau’s decisions to support projects aiming at strengthening capacity 
at national levels to m onitor and report on SDG indicator 16.10.2 as part of measuring progress 
towards SDG 16, therefore:  
1. Encourages  Member States to enhance legal regulatory frameworks on access to 
information at the national level as well as the effective implementation o f these frameworks, 
as part of their commitments to advance the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda;  
 
2. Further encourages  Member States  to  continue monitoring  and  reporting  progress  on  
SDG indicator  16.10.2  through  forthcoming  Voluntary Nation al Reviews and through 
responding to UNESCO’s annual survey, and to engage - where applicable - the oversight 
bodies responsible for access to information in the collection of data;  
 
3. Invites  the IPDC Bureau to continue supporting grass -roots projects that will help Member 
States in data -collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access to information, 
including strengthening monitoring and reporting capacities of oversight bodies re sponsible for 
access to information;  
 
4. Requests  the IPDC Secretariat:  
 
a. to further strengthen collaboration with other UN agencies, civil society 
organizations, networks of oversight bodies responsible for access to information, 
intergovernmental bodies, and other concerned stakeholders in advocacy, capacity 
building and aware ness raising efforts on Indicator 16.10.2;  
 
b.  to continue publishing a biennial report on worldwide progress towards SDG 
indicator 16.10.2, with a view to giving visibility to national efforts to monitor and 
report on access to information, to contributing  data to the International Day for 
Universal Access to Information, and to further sensitizing relevant  stakeholders 
on  the crosscutting significance of access  to information in achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals;  
 
c. to report to the IPDC Bureau in 2021 and to the Council in 2022 about the progress 
made on the above.  
 