United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
ASSESSING 
INTERNET 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
Using UNESCO’s Internet 
Universality ROAM-X Indicators KENYA
UNESCO SERIES OF INTERNET UNIVERSALITY NATIONAL ASSESSMENTSThis is the 4th edition of UNESCO Publication Series on 
Internet Universality National Assessments. This Series is a 
means to share good practices in voluntarily assessing the 
Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators at national level. 
It follows the resolution of UNESCO’s 31st session of the 
Council of the International Programme for the Development 
of Communication (IPDC) in November 2018, by which 
Member States were given the green light to engage in 
voluntary assessments of their Internet environment using 
the ROAM-X Indicators. 
By evaluating a given country’s Internet environment 
against the ROAM-X indicators, the national assessment 
process aims to:
- Present a comprehensive and substantive understanding 
of the national Internet environment and policies;
- Assess their alignment to UNESCO’s R.O.A.M. principles 
and their contribution to sustainable development;
- Develop policy recommendations and practical 
initiatives that will enable the country to improve their 
Internet ecosystem as advanced ICTs evolve.
The national assessment of Kenya is the 4th edition of the 
Series, following Brazil, Benin and Senegal.
UNESCO’S 
INTERNET 
UNIVERSALITY 
INDICATORS8QLWHG1DWLRQV
(GXFDWLRQDO6FLHQWL¿FDQG
&XOWXUDO2UJDQL]DWLRQ
A Framework for Assessing Internet DevelopmentUnited Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
ASSESSING 
INTERNET 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
Using UNESCO’s Internet 
Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsBRAZIL
UNESCO SERIES OF INTERNET UNIVERSALITY NATIONAL ASSESSMENTSOrganisation
des Nations Unies
pour l’éducation,
la science et la culture
Evaluation du 
développement 
de l’Internet au 
BÉNIN
Utilisation des indicateurs ROAM-X de l’Universalité de 
l’Internet de l’UNESCO
SÉRIE DE PUBLICATIONS SUR LES EVALUATIONS NATIONALES DE L’UNIVERSALITÉ D’INTERNET DE L’UNESCOÉVALUATION DU 
DÉVELOPPEMENT DE 
L’INTERNET AU  
SÉRIE DE PUBLICATIONS SUR LES ÉVALUATIONS NATIONALES DE L’UNIVERSALITÉ D’INTERNET DE L’UNESCOOrganisation
des Nations Unies
pour l’éducation,
la science et la culture
SÉNÉGAL
Utilisation des Indicateurs ROAM-X  
de l’Universalité de l’Internet de l’UNESCOASSESSING 
INTERNET 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
Using UNESCO’s Internet 
Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsKENYA
The Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTANet)
UNESCO Series of Internet Universality Indicators National Assessments
Note: This is an assessment of 109 core indicators instead of the full set of 303 indicators, and it is therefore not 
intended to cover all dimensions of the digital ecosystem in the country, but serves to take stock of significant progress 
and signal those gaps in a need to be improved in adhering to ROAM framework. As the Internet environment is 
changing very fast, so are the data collected and analysis and recommendations made upon. UNESCO encourages 
countries to continue the dialogues about the findings, and to update the assessment after due time while also keeping 
track of the latest developments to monitor and adapt and sometimes strengthen the recommendations to further enhance 
their impact, as appropriate.Published in 2020 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
7 place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
 
© UNESCO, 2020
ISBN: 978-92-3-100408-7
 
 
This publication is available in Open Access under the attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the 
users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://www.unesco.
org/open-access/terms-use-ccbya-en).
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, 
territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of 
UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
 
UNESCO Project Coordination: Xianhong Hu, Karen Landa and John Okande
Email: Internet.indicators@unesco.org
Website: http://en.unesco.org/Internetuniversality
International Technical Advisors: David Souter
Graphic design, cover design, illustrations, and typeset: UNESCO
Copy-editing: Sara Moussi
Printed by UNESCO
Printed in France
 
UNESCO Internet Universality Indicators project was supported by Sweden, the Internet Society (ISOC), the 
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the Brazilian Network Information Center 
(NIC.br), as well as the Latin America and Caribbean Network Information Centre (LACNIC). 
Preface
The global crisis linked to the COVID-19 pandemic underlines how 
crucial it is for our societies to have access to information and to the 
Internet in order to strengthen our resilience in the face of the multiple 
challenges facing humanity.
Through the concept of Internet Universality, UNESCO is working for 
the development of the Internet to foster sustainable development. This 
concept, endorsed by Member States in 2015 during UNESCO’s 38th 
General Conference, is based on the four ROAM principles – meaning 
that UNESCO stands for an Internet that is human-Rights based, Open, Accessible to all, and 
governed through Multi-stakeholder participation. At the heart of UNESCO’s positioning on issues 
related to Internet governance, this same concept constitutes the basis of the present national 
voluntary assessment report of UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators in Kenya.
Beyond its conceptual approach, the Internet Universality Indicators serve as a tangible and 
practical tool to enable an environment conducive to the development of the Internet, by way of 
an alignment with the ROAM principles. That is why, over a period of two years, and through 
a global, open and multi-stakeholder process, UNESCO worked towards the elaboration of 
the Internet Universality Indicators – an unprecedented instrument designed to allow Member 
States to assess Internet development at the national level. The Indicators render possible a 
“diagnosis” of national Internet environments from a ROAM perspective, which can inform 
recommendations for actions that build on the Internet’s strengths and harness the knowledge 
gained for its improvements.
The framework of Internet Universality consists of 303 indicators, of which 109 “core” ones. The 
indicators examine the four ROAM categories, and look at cross-cutting issues such as gender 
equality, children and youth, trust and digital security. In addition, a series of contextual indicators 
serve to situate the findings within the specific country.
The present voluntary assessment report of Internet Universality Indicators in Kenya contributes, 
along with the reports in Benin and Senegal, to paving the way for similar assessments in other 
countries, notably in Africa. Its production is owed to the excellent work of The Kenya ICT Action 
Network (KICTANet), and to the fruitful engagement of the Multi-stakeholder Advisory Board.
It is important to stress the significance of conducting this assessment through an inclusive bottom-
up exercise that empowers multi-stakeholderism as an innovative governance model in the country 
3
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsPreface
while addressing Internet Universality principles concretely. This is an example of ground-level 
Digital Co-operation, as promoted by the UN Secretary General. 
This assessment provides a roadmap for the country to discuss and reform its Internet policies 
and digital environment. UNESCO recognizes that the policy recommendations formulated in the 
report as the important outcome delivered by this national multi-stakeholders process and reflects 
the consensus reached by national stakeholders on the way forward. UNESCO will continue 
to engage with key national policy makers and stakeholders to trigger policy discussions and 
facilitate transforming those key recommendations into actions and changes. UNESCO will also 
continue its effort to ensure those actions and changes to take place in line with international 
standards and with the objective of harnessing digital opportunities for sustainable development. 
UNESCO stands also ready to assist in strengthening the recommendations and follow-up actions 
with more international expertise.
To meet UNESCO ‘s Member States and all stakeholders’ increasing demand to access and use 
the ROAM-X indicators and national assessments related data, tools and reports, a consolidated 
online platform and policy observatory that will gather a variety of UNESCO indicators and 
enable data optimization is being developed. At the international level, UNESCO will launch 
a Dynamic Coalition on Internet Universality at the Internet Governance Forum of 2020, aiming 
to offer a new space for sharing experiences and raising awareness of the Indicators.
It is my hope that the insights and recommendations contained in this report will trigger fruitful 
policy discussion on possible actions to be implemented, and thus contribute to highlighting the 
relevance of the principles of Internet Universality for sustainable development in Kenya.
In this spirit, I wish you a pleasant reading.
Moez Chakchouk 
Assistant Director-General for Communication and Information 
UNESCO 
4
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsPreface
Foreword
Kenya’s Internet access and use rates have continued to grow over the past decade. The country 
leads in the uptake of ICTs in East Africa and remains active in national, regional and global 
Internet discourses.
The Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTANet) is proud to have conducted this assessment using 
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators. KICTANet is a multistakeholder platform for people and 
institutions interested in ICT policy and regulation. It aims to catalyse ICT reforms while ensuring 
that ICT policy making processes adopt open, accessible, human-rights based approaches that 
are characterized by multistakeholder participation. This objective set the foundation of years of 
fruitful collaboration with UNESCO and is indeed in line with the UNESCO ROAM-X framework. 
This report is a product of the efforts of a team of researchers, supported by a Multistakeholder 
Advisory Board (MAB), as well as a range of several stakeholders, who also participated in the 
validation meeting and contributed to the discussions on the KICTANet mailing list. The research 
team to whom we are truly grateful, worked on this report from September 2019, gathering 
and analysing data, seeking out comments from different stakeholders, incorporating feedback 
and finally, preparing the final report.
KICTANet promotes a multistakeholder approach and embraces collaboration, open engagement 
and partnerships. Its sustained engagement of a broad range of stakeholders since its formation 
in 2006 on different ICT policy making processes exemplify the benefits of the multistakeholder 
model. Since March 2005, there have been 35,746 emails in 10,274 discussion threads 
covering various ICT Policy issues on KICTANet’s email discussions list. Additionally, KICTANet 
has had valuable engagements with the ICT committees of Parliament (Senate and the National 
Assembly). As a result, policies such as Kenya’s ICT Policy 2006, the ICT Policy 2019, the 
National Broadband Strategy, Kenya Information and Communication Act 2009, the Computer 
Misuse and Cybercrimes Act, 2018, and the Data Protection Act 2019 have benefitted from 
multistakeholder input championed by KICTANet. 
The Network continues to draw its strength from crowdsourcing ideas, conducting research and 
advocating for policy change in the public interest. In line with its research mandate, this report 
will provide a sound basis to further KICTANet’s engagements and buttress its framework for 
cooperation and collaboration in ICT matters in partnership with industry, technical community, 
academia, media, civil society, development partners and Government. 
5
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsForeword
KICTANet considers this publication yet another milestone, and hopes that it shall be a useful 
contribution to the development of sound policy, legal, regulatory and technical approaches and 
responses that shall ultimately promote the development of the ICT sector in Kenya.
Grace Githaiga and Victor Kapiyo
Lead Researchers
6
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsForeword
Acknowledgements
The Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTANet) is grateful to, and appreciates the support accorded 
by all stakeholders involved in the development of this publication. 
We thank the Multistakeholder Advisory Board who volunteered their time to guide the 
development of the publication. Moreover, we are grateful to the team of ten researchers for 
their commitment and dedication to prepare the report to its conclusion. The team of researchers 
include:
Rights: Victor Kapiyo and Angela Minayo 
Accessibility: Mwendwa Kivuva and Elizabeth Orembo
Openness: Grace Mutung’u and Tevin Mwenda
Multistakeholderism: Grace Githaiga and Mwara Gichanga
X-Cross Cutting Issues: Dr. Wambui Wamunyu and Cecilia Maundu
KICTANet acknowledges with much appreciation the expert comments received from: Patrick 
Ochieng, John Kieti, Andrew Limo, John Walubengo, Stanley Murage, Bob Ochieng, Beatrice 
Sigilai, Thomas Kaberi, Athena Morgan, David Indeje, Barrack Otieno and Medika Medi.
We also thank Dr. Lucy Gichaga for reviewing the publication and providing valuable comments 
and guidance. Also, we are grateful for the administrative support provided by Mwara Gichanga 
and Anne Mwaura. 
Further, we are grateful to the KICTANet Trustees and the UNESCO team for their support 
throughout the process of this research. 
Finally, we appreciate the leadership of Grace Githaiga and Victor Kapiyo who not only led 
the conduct of the research, but also edited this report.
7
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsAcknowledgements
Table of Contents
Preface 3
Foreword 5
Acknowledgements 7
Table of Contents 8
Lists of Charts and Tables 11
Abbreviations and Acronyms 12
Executive Summary  14
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION  21
Background of the UNESCO Internet Universality Indicators  22
National Context of the Assessment initiative 23
Methodology 23
Structure of the Report 24
CHAPTER 2: CONTEXTUAL INDICATORS: FINDINGS 27
Economic Indicators 28
Demographic Indicators 31
Development Indicato 32
Equality Indicators 34
8
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsTable of Contents
Governance Indicators 35
ICT Development Indicators 36
CHAPTER 3: CATEGORY R – RIGHTS 41
Theme A – Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 42
Theme B – Freedom of Expression 44
Theme C – Right of Access to Information 47
 Theme D –  Freedom of Association and the Right to take part in the Conduct  
of Public Affairs 51
Theme E – The Right to Privacy 54
Theme F – Social, Economic and Cultural Rights 57
Policy Recommendations for Various Stakeholders 61
CHAPTER 4: CATEGORY O – OPENNESS 65
Theme A – Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 66
Theme B – Open Standards 68
Theme C – Open Markets 70
Theme D – Open Content 74
Theme E – Open Data and Open Government 76
Policy Recommendations for Various Stakeholders 82
CHAPTER 5: CATEGORY A  – ACCESSIBILITY TO ALL  85
Theme A – Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 86
Theme B – Connectivity and Usage 89
Theme C – Affordability 95
Theme D – Equitable Access 98
Theme E – Local Content and Language 102
Theme F – Capabilities / Competencies 104
Policy Recommendations for Various Stakeholders 108
9
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsTable of Contents
CHAPTER 6: CATEGORY M – MULTI-STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION 111
Theme A – Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 112
Theme B – National Internet Governance 115
Theme C – International and Regional Internet Governance 121
Policy Recommendations for Various Stakeholders 126
CHAPTER 7: CATEGORY X  – CROSS-CUTTING INDICATORS 129
Theme A – Gender 130
Theme B – Children 140
Theme C – Sustainable Development 145
Theme D – Trust and Security 147
Theme E – Legal and Ethical Aspects of the Internet 150
Policy Recommendations for Various Stakeholders 152
CHAPTER 8: CONCLUSIONS AND KEY PRIORITY RECOMMENDATIONS, 
BY STAKEHOLDER GROUPS 155
Major Findings and Challenges categorized by ROAM –X indicators 156
Key Recommendations for Action by Stakeholder Groups  158
ANNEX 1: LIST OF MULTISTAKEHOLDER ADVISORY BOARD 166
ANNEX 2: LIST OF PEER REVIEWERS 167
10
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsTable of Contents
Lists of Charts  
and Tables
Figure 1. Kenya’s GDP per Capita from 2006 to 2018 in the chart 28
Figure 2. Gross National Income (GNI) (purchasing power parity) per capita 29
Figure 3. Proportion of GDP attributable to services  30
Figure 4. The population growth trend 31
Table 1. Kenya’s HDI trends  32
Table 2. Number of Social media users in Kenya in 2017 90
Table 3. Broadband Subscriptions by Speed 2014-2018  91
Table 4. The average speeds offered by the major mobile service providers in Kenya 92
Table 5. Number of unique broadband subscribers in Kenya 2014 - 2018 93
Table 6. A comparison of Safaricom, Airtel and Jamii Faiba 4G  97
Table 7. Patterns of social media usage in Kenya aggregated by gender 100
Table 8. Barriers to Internet Access and Use in Kenya in 2017 100
Table 9. Kenya Country domain registration trends, 2014 - 2018 102
Table 10. Ratio of Men to women in leadership/management roles at  
ICT-related entities in Kenya 132
Table 11. Kenya Mobile phone use in seven days prior to survey (2010) 133
Table 12. Reported use of computers by gender in Kenya (2010)  133
Table 13. ICT access and s gender statistics 134
Table 14. Survey on Children aged 12-17 Use of Internet in Kenya 141
Table 15. Risky activities engaged in by children 142
11
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsLists of Charts  and Tables
Abbreviations  
and Acronyms
CA Communications Authority of Kenya
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
COFEK Consumers Federation of Kenya
CERT Computer Emergency Response Team
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility
FOSS Free and Open-Source Software
GNI Gross National Income
HDI Human Development Index
HIS Health Information System
ICT Information, Communication, and Technology
ICESR International Covenant on Social and Economic Rights
ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
IPDC International Programme for the Development of Communication
ISPs Internet Services Providers
ITU International Telecommunication Union
JAWS Job Access with Speech
KENIC Kenya Network Information Centre
KENET Kenya Education Network
KICTANet Kenya ICT Action Network
KICA Kenya Information and Communications Act
KNCHR Kenya National Human Rights Commission
MAB Multistakeholder Advisory Board
NCS National Communication Secretariat
NEMIS National Education Management Information System
OER Open Educational Resources
OGP Open Government Partnership
OTT Over the Top Technologies
PWD Persons with Disability
12
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsAbbreviations  and Acronyms
ROAM-X Indicators Rights, Openness, Accessibility, multistakeholder and cross -cutting indicators
PPP Public-private partnership 
SMS Short Message Services
SMEs Small and medium-sized enterprises
ULF Unified Licensing Framework
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USF Universal Service Fund
USSD Unstructured Supplementary Service Data
13
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsAbbreviations and Acronyms 
Executive Summary
This report provides the findings of UNESCO Internet Universality Indicators pilot assessment 
in Kenya, undertaken by the Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTANet) and completed in March 
2020. The report assessed the core indicators of UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators 
in line with the approved methodology and guidelines. KICTANet adopted a multistakeholder 
approach including hosting a validation forum in February 2020 to get feedback and finally 
developed focused recommendations for various stakeholder groups. The assessment has found 
that Kenya has a robust Internet environment that is developing in line with international best 
practice. However, some shortcomings were noted in the various result areas under review. 
R - Rights
Kenya has a comprehensive policy, legal and institutional framework for human rights which 
adopts international human rights standards for among others: freedom of expression, access 
to information, freedom of association, the right to participate in the conduct of public affairs, 
right to privacy, and social economic and cultural rights. While there is no legislation blocking 
Internet access, there are legal restrictions of human rights, and challenges in enforcement and 
implementation. Also, there is limited focus by key actors to systematically monitor the state of 
human rights particularly with respect to the digital environment. Also, awareness across key 
sectors on the UN Business and Human Rights principles and individual rights remains areas 
of concern. 
O - Openness
While Kenya’s ICT sector operates as an open market economy, there are a number of factors 
affecting the provision of ICT services. The country adopted a unified licensing framework (ULF) for 
the telecommunications sector. However, there are no clear regulations for open standards, free 
and open software and other licensing options for new areas of technology. Also, government 
policy and support for Internet access for persons with disability remains a challenge. Further, 
developing policies on open markets, open content, open data and open government initiatives 
will be critical. However, the lack of non-commercial perspectives only benefits commercial 
players at the expense of other key players. The absence of overarching open standards may 
deny local technologists transfer of knowledge. Also, there is little awareness and policies for 
accessibility of government services online. 
14
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
A - Accessibility
Internet access has tremendously increased over the years largely due to favorable policies 
adopted by the government, investments by key stakeholders, and a vibrant population that has 
embraced technology. While the Internet penetration rate stands at 49% of which 98% connect 
through mobile data, there are gaps and disparities in connectivity and usage, affordability, 
equitable access, key platforms, capabilities and competencies and local content and language. 
The government has embraced digitization of its services but at the same time enlarged the 
access-divide. Moreover, while the Constitution and the Access to Information Act, 2016 promote 
access to information, Internet access is not a right. It was also observed that there was limited 
evidence-based research and few comprehensive digital literacy programmes.
M - Multistakeholder
Kenya’s constitution has adopted the concept of multistakeholderism in its principle of public 
participation under its Article 10. The key policy making bodies include the National 
Communication Secretariat (NCS), the Ministry of ICT, the Communications Authority (CA) 
and Parliament. However, public engagement on key policy issues can be limited due to 
the absence of a law on public participation, low awareness and understanding of policy 
processes, and unwillingness of policy making bodies to proactively share information in a timely 
fashion to enable meaningful engagement. However, there are valuable engagements between 
stakeholders on national Internet governance. Kenya was among the first countries in Africa to 
host the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) in 2009. The Kenya IGF (KIGF), now in its 11th year, 
has been convened by KICTANet since 2008 and is hailed as one of the continent’s success 
stories for multistakeholder engagement. 
X - Cross-cutting Issues
Cross-cutting issues such as gender, children, sustainable development, trust and security and 
legal ethical aspects affect the Internet ecosystem in Kenya. The government has enacted several 
laws and policies which recognize and address the cross-cutting issues, however, there are 
challenges in implementation, enforcement and institutional capacities. Also, there continues 
to be a gender divide in Internet access and use in Kenya, particularly in the rural areas. The 
safety of children online and access to education remain areas requiring attention. Moreover, 
there is limited empirical research on the impact of the cross-cutting issues on the Internet in the 
country. The need to enhance the nation’s cybersecurity posture, build national capability, foster 
information sharing and collaboration, and provide national leadership in cybersecurity will be 
critical. Also, addressing the limited public awareness, coupled with the growing digital divide 
remain areas of concern.
15
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
Key Policy Recommendations
Government
• Adopt the multistakeholder model, enact a policy, legal and institutional framework for 
public participation and citizen engagement, and embrace multistakeholder participation 
in government delegations to international and key treaty making conferences. 
• Enforce and periodically evaluate the implementation of policies and laws affecting the 
Internet and human rights in the digital environment. 
• Invest in evidence-based research to provide accurate and diverse statistics for policy and 
decision-making on areas covered by the ROAM-X indicators. 
• Adopt a clear cultural heritage policy to fulfill article 11 of the Constitution.
• Review the licensing framework to include non-commercial business models for provision of 
ICT services such as community networks. 
• Lower taxes for mobile phones to increase affordability among the citizens.
• Implement the two-thirds gender quota to ensure balanced representation in ICT policy 
making processes and in decision-making positions. 
• Reform the Children Act to address child sexual exploitation, cyberbullying, and exposure 
of children to inappropriate content.
• Develop a robust cybersecurity strategy coupled with an effective legal, policy and 
institutional framework. 
• Train and equip law enforcement officers on cybersecurity. 
Private Sector
• Embrace and commit to the United Nations Business and Human Rights Principles.
• Collaborate with other stakeholders including civil society to advance human rights. 
• Partner with the academia to generate evidence-based research and development.
• Invest in infrastructure including in areas that are unconnected or are not profitable as part 
of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
• Engage the government together with other stakeholders on proposed policies and laws, 
and initiate proposals that promote a conducive business environment.
• Adopt privacy by design approach as a mandatory feature. 
16
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
Academia
• Conduct more issue and evidence-based research on the use and impact of technology 
and the thematic areas under ROAM-X in Kenya to inform decision and policy making.
• Curate government content for use by future generations. 
• Engage and partner with other stakeholders in research projects. 
• Research on children’s access and usage of ICT across social economic, cultural and 
geographical areas.
• Carry out empirical research and capture and record data aggregated by key areas in 
relation to ICT such as gender, age, geography, demographics, and cultural contents.
Technical Community
• Promote human rights in technical innovation and incorporate human rights principles and 
best practice in technology design and use. 
• Cultivate interest and participate in policy making processes together with other stakeholders. 
• Advocate for an enabling environment to operate in, including for innovation and favorable 
work conditions.
• Promote ethical practices in the community and work towards ensuring principles are 
embedded in software and mobile application development.
• Partner with other stakeholders to strengthen the ICT ecosystem in Kenya. 
Civil Society
• Monitor and report on human rights violations, including on digital platforms. 
• Engage with stakeholders to address human rights violations.
• Rank government websites and portals for ease of use. 
• Test open data spaces and practices to provide evidence-based policy making on open 
data. 
• Create awareness on consumer digital rights. 
• Conduct research and collate data on all multistakeholder engagements to track participation, 
and monitor inclusion, diversity and stakeholder representation.
• Advocate to ensure the gaps identified in the ROAM-X study are addressed.
17
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
Individual Users
• Monitor the practices of other stakeholders and resist abuse of their rights online and seek 
redress from the appropriate agencies whenever there is a violation. 
• Cultivate interest, and endeavor to participate in awareness creation programs on Internet 
governance and the meaning of multistakeholderism.
• Make children aware of both the positive and negative aspects of the Internet, from the 
family level, the education system and the wider society and this can be done through 
literacy campaigns by the government, media and other interested parties.
Media and Journalists
• Use their platforms to create awareness of the public on their rights online.
• Report and cover more news stories on Internet governance and the multistakeholder nature 
of Internet governance. 
• Sensitize and create awareness on Internet governance issues, in a timely fashion.
• Engage in national, regional and global forums to understand and build knowledge in the 
area of Internet governance.
• Provide regular coverage on the areas covered under the ROAM-X indicators.
18
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
201 
INTRODUCTION 
21Background of the UNESCO Internet 
Universality Indicators 
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators aim to assess levels of achievement, in individual 
countries, of the four fundamental ROAM principles included in the concept of ‘Internet Universality’ 
which supports an Internet that is based on human Rights (R), that is Open (O), Accessible to all 
(A) and nurtured by Multistakeholder participation (M). They contain 303 indicators (including 
109 core ones) developed under 6 categories, 25 themes, and 124 questions. On top of the 
ROAM categories, 79 cross-cutting Indicators (category X) have been developed concerning 
gender and the needs of children and young people, sustainable development, trust and security, 
and legal and ethical aspects of the Internet. In addition, the framework includes 21 contextual 
indicators concerned with the demographic, social, and economic characteristics of a country.
UNESCO undertook a three-year cycle to develop the framework of Internet Universality 
Indicators through a global, open, inclusive and multistakeholder process. During the 31st 
Council Meeting of UNESCO’s International Programme for the Development of Communication 
(IPDC) In November 2018, these Indicators were endorsed.1 The IPDC supported the use of 
the instrument on a voluntary basis by member states terming it a useful resource accessible 
to Member States and stakeholders. The support is through the assessment of national Internet 
growth using the Internet Universality Indicators. 
UNESCO has been working with various stakeholders in different countries in implementing 
this decision. This has been through the engagement of stakeholders who conduct national 
assessments based on the Indicators framework. It is in light of this that KICTANet expressed 
interest and ultimately partnered with UNESCO to undertake Kenya’s assessment.
The objectives of the assessment of the UNESCO Internet Universality Indicators include:
1. Developing a clear and substantive understanding of the national Internet environment and 
of Internet policies contributing to sustainable development;
2. Assessing the environment and policies in relation to the implementation of UNESCO’s 
ROAM principles; and, 
3. Formulating policy recommendations that can help improve Internet development in Kenya.
1 Decisions taken by the 31st Council Session of the International Program for the Development of Communication (IPDC), 21-22 
November 2018, UNESCO HQ https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000266235 
22
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators1Background of the UNESCO Internet Universality Indicators 
IntroductionNational Context of the Assessment 
initiative
Kenya’s Internet access and use subscription has been on the rise over the past decade. By 
September 2019, it stood at 52 million, of which 25.2 million subscriptions were broadband 
connections, while mobile subscriptions stood at 53.2 million.2 Many people access the Internet 
from their mobile phones or other SIM enabled devices. This has placed Kenya as an ICT 
progressive nation in the Eastern Africa Region. The country has been active in national, regional 
and global Internet discourses. It is therefore natural that the country was selected to participate 
in this assessment of Internet Universality Indicators. 
These indicators were developed to allow countries to carry out a deeper analysis of the Internet 
Universality concept at country level using the UNESCO framework of indicators. Accordingly, 
the exact purpose of this framework of Internet Universality Indicators is to facilitate interested 
governments and other stakeholders that may want to voluntarily evaluate their national Internet 
environments as a means of formulating evidence-based policy. In addition, these Internet 
Universality indicators are based on the previous experience of UNESCO with media and 
communications-related indicator frameworks. The indicator system for the Internet Universality 
Indicators is further intended to support efforts by the United Nations and other stakeholders to 
track and assess progress and achievement of the SDGs.
Methodology
KICTANet commenced this survey on September 3, 2019 and completed on April 14, 2020. 
The assessment methodology was based on UNESCO’s Implementation Guide for conducting 
national assessments based on the ROAM-X framework.3 The implementation of the framework 
involved careful planning and execution of the eight steps outlined in the guide. The process 
commenced with the establishment of the Multistakeholder Advisory Board; building a collaborative
2 Communications Authority of Kenya (CA). Second Quarter Sector Statistics Report for the Financial Year 2019/2020 (October-
December 2019) https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q2-2019-2020-1.pdf
3 UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators: A Framework for Assessing Internet Development https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000367617 /PDF/367617eng.pdf.multi 
23
1National Context of the Assessment initiative
Introduction
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators research team; developing a research action plan; data gathering; data analysis; report-writing 
and recommendations; and the organizing of a national validation multistakeholder workshop 
and conducting related advocacy activities. The last step, which is the Impact assessment and 
monitoring will be done at a later date. 
The data gathering and data analysis process included the desktop review of relevant ICT 
literature including policies, laws, reports and documents. Assessment of some indicators required 
interviews with select experts, and KICTANet was able to conduct the interviews with key select 
interviewees. Also, there was a request to the Regulator to provide certain information that is not 
available publicly, and some discussion to seek information was obtained from the KICTANet 
mailing list. The findings in the form of a draft report were shared with the Multistakeholder 
Advisory Board (MAB) as well as an external expert as part of the peer review process. 
A consultative validation meeting was convened in February 2020 which brought together 
industry stakeholders and the MAB. The feedback obtained from the external reviewers and the 
meeting were incorporated into the report.
Structure of the Report
This report is organized around the context of the Internet Universality Indicators. It addresses 
the four ROAM Principles, and the cross-cutting issues such as gender and children’s needs, 
sustainable development, trust and security, and the Internet’s legal and ethical dimensions. 
Together, these form the framework for ROAM-X Indicators, and accordingly each is articulated 
in a separate chapter. 
Moreover, contextual indicators have also been assessed. They include the country’s economic, 
demographic, development, equality, governance and ICT development characteristics. The aim 
is to contextualize the findings of the report in terms of the conditions that are unique to Kenya.
The report commences with an introduction to the UNESCO Internet Universality Indicators. The 
Contextual Indicators on areas as economic, demographic, development, equality, governance 
and ICT development are highlighted. Then the five ROAM-X categories are covered. Each 
category is divided into a number of themes, and there are six themes in the R and A categories, 
five themes in the O and C categories, and three themes in the M category.
24
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators1Structure of the Report
IntroductionSeveral questions are set out within each theme addressing the specific points on which national 
performance is assessed and on which evidence is used for assessment. Further, one or more 
indicators are identified for each question to provide the evidence base for the assessment 
of the question, and a finding is made for each indicator. Each category includes policy 
recommendations specific to various stakeholders such as government, civil society, academia, 
media and so forth. Finally, conclusions from the findings of each category are summarized 
and key priority recommendations are formulated in terms of relevance to stakeholder groups.
25
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators1Structure of the Report
Introduction262
CONTEXTUAL 
INDICATORS: 
FINDINGS
27Kenya is East Africa’s commercial, financial and transport hub with the International financial 
institutions and donors being key to Kenya’s economic growth and development. The country’s 
administration has been successful in courting external investment for development and for 
instance, Kenya’s President Uhuru Kenyatta in the beginning of 2020 secured major investment 
deals at the UK-Africa Investment Summit.4 Kenya has also been successful in raising capital in 
the global bond market. 
ECONOMIC   
Indicators
Kenya is ranked as a lower middle income country.5 Its real GDP growth is estimated to be at 
5.7 percent with a projection of 5.9 percent growth forecast for 2020.6 This places Kenya as 
the 62nd largest economy in the world by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).7
Figure 1. Kenya’s GDP per Capita from 2006 to 2018 in the chart
Source: WWW.CEICDATA.COM | CEIC Data
4 Nyambega Gisesa. Uhuru secures Sh170 billion investment deals at UK-Africa summit. January 20, 2020. https:/ /www.
nation.co.ke/news/Uhuru-secures-Sh170bn-investment-deals/1056-5425412-987abh/index.html
5 CIA World Factbook . Kenya Economy: an overview . December 7 , 2019. https:/ /www.indexmundi.com/kenya/economy_
overview.html
6 Capital FM. World Bank revises downwards Kenya’s GDP 2019 growth to 5.7pc . April 9, 2019. https:/ /www.capitalfm.
co.ke/business/2019/04/world-bank-revises-downwards-kenyas-gdp-2019-growth-to-5-7pc/
7 IMF. Report for selected countries and subjects . www.imf.org 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 20072000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800891.863976.871 981.3051039.754 1060.8921238.6571318.3371430.324 1449.5501525.0831690.2601839.031
GDP per Capita: USD
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
28
Economic  Indicators
Contextual indicators: Findings
2The current government’s development blueprint espouses what is termed as “the Big 4 Agenda”. 
These 4 agendas are; food security, affordable housing, manufacturing, and affordable 
healthcare. It is anticipated that the investments to support implementation of the Big 4 Agenda 
and enhanced business sentiment will contribute to enhanced economic growth.8 Further, the 
agenda is aligned to Kenya’s Vision 2030 development blueprint9 whose aim is to “transform 
Kenya into a newly industrializing, middle-income country providing a high quality of life to all 
its citizens by 2030 in a clean and secure environment”.
Figure 2. Gross National Income (GNI) (purchasing power parity) per capita
GNI per capita, PPP (current international $) in Kenya was reported at 3440 in 2018. Source: the World Bank.
Agriculture continues to be the backbone of the Kenyan economy with a contribution of a third of 
the country’s GDP.10 About 75 percent of Kenya’s approximately 47.6 million11 population works 
in the agricultural sector at least part-time. This includes livestock and pastoral activities. Tourism 
also holds an important place in the economy of Kenya. Others are the telecommunications, 
transport and construction sectors.
8 The World Bank in Kenya . September 30, 2019. https:/ /www.worldbank.org/en/country/kenya/overview
9 Kenya’s Vision 2030. http:/ /vision2030.go.ke/
10 Index Mundi. Kenya Economy Profile 2019. https:/ /www.indexmundi.com/kenya/economy_profile.html
11 2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Results https:/ /www.knbs.or.ke/?p=5621 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
29 Economic Indicators 
Contextual indicators: Findings
2Figure 3. Proportion of GDP attributable to services 
Source: World Bank © Statista 2020
The country has an increasing entrepreneurial middle class and steady growth. However, poor 
governance and corruption continue to hamper the country’s economic and development path. 
Further, while it is difficult to find accurate numbers, unemployment and underemployment remain 
high affecting 40 percent of the population.12 For instance in 2019, over three hundred and 
eighty eight companies and firms were wound up in a span of six months.13 Apart from the 
growing concern about massive job losses in Kenya’s private sector, it is also seen as a reflection 
of the performance of many of the country’s major corporations that reported job cuts in 2019.
12 Ibid
13 Frankline Sunday. Alarm as 388 Kenyan firms dissolved in 6 months. September 21, 2019. https:/ /www.standardmedia.
co.ke/business/article/2001342752/alarm-as-388-kenyan-firms-dissolved-in-6-months0,00%10,00%20,00%30,00%40,00%50,00%60,00%70,00%80,00%90,00%100,00%Kenya: Share of economic sectors in the gross domestic product (GDP) 
 from 2008 to 2018
Agriculture Industry ServicesAdditional Information:
Kenya; World Bank200822,20%18,58%50,12%
200923,36%18,75%49,32%
201024,83%18,55%48,11%
201126,30%18,91%47,08%
201226,17%18,60%47,73%
201326,44%18,02%48,01%
201427,45%17,44%47,98%
201530,19%17,30%46,22%
201631,07%17,89%45,23%
201734,83%16,84%41,98%
201834,19%16,39%42,67%
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
30
Economic Indicators 
Contextual indicators: Findings
2DEMOGRAPHIC   
Indicators
Kenya lies on the equator where it borders the Indian Ocean, Uganda, Tanzania, Ethiopia, 
South Sudan and Somalia.14 According to its 2020 population census, the country has an 
estimated 47,564,296 million people (24 million women and 23.6 men) compared to 38.6 
million in 2010.15 
Kenya’s population rose by 2.2 percent annually (approximately a million people yearly) from 
2009 to 2019 to stand at 47.6 million, which is a decrease in growth rate from 2.9 percent 
in the previous 10-year period.16
Figure 4. The population growth trend
As shown in Figure 4 above, the country’s growth rate remains rapid in global terms. It is 
anticipated that the fertility rate will decrease and will result in the population growth rate 
decreasing to 1.5% by 2040. At that point it will be the 42nd fastest growing population in 
the world and the 38th fastest growing population in Africa.17 In 2017, the country had a 
projected life expectancy of 67 years, which is still short of the global expectancy of 72 years. 
14 World Population Review. Kenya Population 2020 . http:/ /worldpopulationreview.com/countries/kenya-population/
15 Hellen Githaiga. Kenya census 2019 data reveal population stands at 47 .6m. November 4, 2019. https:/ /www.theeastafrican.
co.ke/news/ea/Kenya-population-soars-to-47-million-2019-census/4552908-5336048-7bv3toz/index.html
16 Pauline Kairu. Kenya’s growth rate now at 2.2pc - Census . November 9, 2019. https:/ /www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/ea/
Kenya-growth-rate-now-at-2-2-percent-census/4552908-5343306-1501ok2z/index.html
17 African Studies Center, East Africa living encyclopedia , https:/ /www.africa.upenn.edu/NEH/kethnic.htm
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
31 Demographic  Indicators
Contextual indicators: Findings
2This draws attention to the severity of the burden of disease and healthcare in the country. That 
being the case, the country has the 31st youngest population in the world.18
Moreover, the country has a diverse ethnic composition and is home to 43 official ethnic groups. 
However, the number might be as high as 60 if smaller groups are included. Kiswahili and 
English are the two official languages.19 Moreover, rapid urbanisation continues to place huge 
pressure on the country’s infrastructure, institutions and land. It is estimated that three-quarters 
(36.6 million) of Kenya’s population live in rural areas.Since, households in rural areas are twice 
as likely to have more members than their urban counterparts, it is estimated that Kenya’s urban 
population will increase by 9 million to reach 21.8 million by 2030, while the rural population 
will rise by nearly 8 million to reach 43.3 million by 2030.20 
DEVELOPMENT   
Indicator
Kenya’s 2018 Human Development Index (HDI) rating was 0.579, which placed the country 
in the medium category of human development. The country ranked 147 out of 189 countries 
and territories.21 However, the HDI value has risen from 0.467 to 0.579, an increase of 23.9 
percent between 1990 and 2018. As shown in the Table 1 below, between 1990 and 2018, 
the country’s life expectancy rose by 8.9 years at birth, while the mean years of schooling 
increased by 2.8. In addition, the anticipated years of schooling grew by 2.0 years, while 
Kenya’s Gross National Income (GNI) per capita rose by 34.7 percent.22 
Table 1. Kenya’s HDI trends 
Life expectancy 
at birthExpected years 
of schoolingMean years 
of schoolingGNI per capita 
(2011 PPP$)HDI value
1990 57.5 9.1 3.7 2,297 0.468
1995 53.9 8.7 4.5 2,130 0.456
2000 51.8 8.4 5.3 2,112 0.451
18 Institute of Security Studies. Kenya to 2030 and beyond. 2018. https:/ /issafrica.s3.amazonaws.com/site/uploads/kenya-
report.pdf
19 African Studies Center, East Africa living encyclopedia , https:/ /www.africa.upenn.edu/NEH/kethnic.htm
20 Institute of Security Studies. Kenya to 2030 and beyond. 2018. https:/ /issafrica.s3.amazonaws.com/site/uploads/kenya-
report.pdf
21 UNDP. Human Development Report 2019 Inequalities in Human Development in the 21st Century. http:/ /hdr.undp.org/sites/
all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/KEN.pdf
22 Ibid. 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
32
Development  Indicator
Contextual indicators: Findings
2Life expectancy 
at birthExpected years 
of schoolingMean years 
of schoolingGNI per capita 
(2011 PPP$)HDI value
2005 55.8 9.4 5.8 2,223 0.490
2010 62.9 10.7 6.1 2,467 0.543
2015 66.7 11.7 6.3 2,806 0.578
2016 67.0 11.9 6.4 2,898 0.585
2017 67.3 12.1 6.5 2,961 0.590
SOURCE: UNDP
Kenya’s HDI for 2018 stood at 0.579. Nonetheless, when the value for inequality is discounted, 
the HDI decreases to 0.426, which is a loss of 26.3 percent due to disparity in the distribution 
of the HDI factor indices.23 When considering gender inequalities, three dimensions are taken 
into consideration namely: reproductive health, which is evaluated by maternal mortality and 
adolescent birth rates; empowerment, assessed by the proportion of parliamentary seats held by 
women, as well as the attainment by class of secondary and higher education; and , economic 
activity, gauged by the rate of participation of women and men in the labor market. In Kenya, 
women hold 23.3 percent of parliamentary seats, and 29.8 percent of adult women have at 
least completed secondary education, compared to 37.3 percent of their male counterparts.24 
Also, 510 women die of pregnancy-related causes for every 100,000 live births; with the teen 
birth rate being 75.1 births per 1,000 women between the ages 15-19.
The government recognizes the need to have literate citizens and puts in measures to improve 
the adult literacy rates. It also provides basic education and training opportunities to out-of-
school youth and adults who either missed their chances in the formal education system in their 
childhood, or dropped out of school before acquiring sustainable literacy skills.25 The rate of 
access to electricity in Kenya is deemed the highest in East Africa standing at 73.42 percent as 
at the end of April 2018. This is as a result of diverse national electrification projects embarked 
on by Kenya Power, which is responsible for electricity distribution.26 In addition, there has 
been rapid investment in the distribution network and increased investment in renewable energy 
generation. Accordingly, the national access rate has gradually grown over the past five years 
from a low of 32 percent in 2013.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid.
25 Kenya’s Ministry of Education. Basic Education Programme Rationale and Approach 2013 - 2018. www.education.go.ke
26 Margaret Njugunah. Kenya has the highest access to electricity in East Africa: WB Research. May 8, 2018. https:/ /www.
capitalfm.co.ke/business/2018/05/kenya-has-highest-access-to-electricity-in-east-africa-wb-research/
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
33 Development Indicator 
Contextual indicators: Findings
2EQUALITY   
Indicators
According to the 2018 Global Gender Gap Report, Kenya ranked 76th globally in tackling 
the gender gap.27 On the other hand, the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap 
Report 2020, ranked Kenya 109 out of the 153 countries that were rated on their progress 
towards gender parity in 2019.28 Women in the country have over the years, endured systemic 
marginalization and discrimination. However, in recent years, the country has taken important 
steps to address the issue, including by instituting legal, policy and institutional reforms to promote 
gender equity. For example, the country’s constitution in its bill of rights provides for the right to 
equality and freedom from discrimination. Further, it also establishes the National Gender and 
Equality Commission (NGEC) as a constitutional commission to promote gender equality and 
freedom from discrimination in the country. 
The constitution also imposes a gender quota requirement to ensure that no single gender holds no 
more than two-thirds of elective and appointive positions in the public service. While in the case 
of appointive positions the rule is attainable, it continues to be a challenge in elective positions 
and in the private sector. For instance, in the Nairobi Securities Exchange-listed companies, 
women account for only 26 percent of the management positions,29 and only 21 percent of the 
board members in listed companies are women.
In addition, the country has made headway in areas such as maternal mortality, attaining gender 
parity in primary education enrolment and is approaching parity in secondary education.30 
However, weak implementation and the lack of gender responsive budgeting has impacted 
the legal and policy frameworks for gender equity. Accordingly, there are still many women 
who have no access to basic services. They also remain underrepresented in decision-making 
positions and political roles. If women’s profiles were improved in all sectors, a reduction in 
gender disparities would ultimately benefit not just women, but men, children, the rich as well 
as the poor and the entire society in general. 
27 Adonijah Ochieng. Kenya making only modest progress in closing gender gap. January 27 , 2019. https:/ /www.
businessdailyafrica.com/datahub/Kenya-making-only-modest-progress-in-closing-gender-gap/3815418-4924942-jwlpeu/
index.html
28 Francis Mureithi. Political participation for Kenyan women yet to meet the constitutional provision. January 2, 2020.  
https:/ /www.nation.co.ke/gender/Kenya-ranked-109-out-of-153-gender-equality--/5362750-5404928-5odwusz/index.
html
29 Adonijah Ochieng. Kenya making only modest progress in closing gender gap. January 27 , 2019. https:/ /www.
businessdailyafrica.com/datahub/Kenya-making-only-modest-progress-in-closing-gender-gap/3815418-4924942-jwlpeu/
index.html
30 Data Hub. Gender Equality Context in Kenya . https:/ /data.em2030.org/countries/kenya/
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
34
Equality  Indicators
Contextual indicators: Findings
2GOVERNANCE   
Indicators
Kenya’s ranking rose from position 19 to 11 in the 2018 Ibrahim Index of African Governance 
report. The report produced by Mo Ibrahim Foundation evaluated contemporary progress in 
governance and in long-term performance. There has been remarkable progress noted in the 
last five years.31 In the economic score which measures the extent to which the government 
facilitates citizens to pursue economic aspirations in order to flourish, Kenya ranked eighth, which 
again was termed remarkable.32 Likewise, the country ranked eighth on the human development 
indicator with 79 percent. This measures the ability of a government e to extend to its citizens 
services such as poverty mitigation and alleviation, educational advancement, healthcare and 
medical and sanitary services. Notably, Kenya was the only country singled out of 10 African 
countries as having the largest gross domestic products in 2017, which the report notes to have 
enhanced the business environment.33
Other areas which were assessed included the independence of the judiciary scoring 76 percent, 
property rights attaining 61 percent, a well-organized power transfer mechanism scored 66.7 
percent, the freedom of expression indicator scored 66.7 percent, and fostering gender equality 
scored 71.7 percent. However, the country scored dismally in safety and rule of law which 
were ranked at position 23, despite being placed in the 11th position on overall governance. 
In addition, the dismal performance on participation and human rights categories resulted in 
the country being flagged as “warning signs.” This indicator measures civil and political rights 
and freedoms through evaluating citizen participation in the political and electoral actions, 
recognition of fundamental rights, and gender recognition.
31 Justus Ochieng. Kenya ranked 1 1 in Africa governance score. October 29, 2018. https:/ /www.nation.co.ke/news/Kenya-
ranked-1 1-in-Africa-governance-score/1056-4826624-hcian9/index.html
32 Ibid.
33 Ibid.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
35 Governance  Indicators
Contextual indicators: Findings
2ICT DEVELOPMENT   
Indicators
The country’s ICT sector has remained robust. In the Global Innovation Index (GII) 2019 survey, 
Kenya was ranked the second-leading innovation center in sub-Saharan Africa by the World 
Intellectual Property Organization.34 Further, the country has a track record of high levels of 
innovation, outperforming innovation levels with respect to GDP for the ninth consecutive year. 
According to the World Bank’s Global information Technology report, Kenya’s ICT Patent 
Cooperation Treaty (PCT) patents rose 0.06% between 2012 and 2016. By August 2016, 
approximately 725 patents had been granted by the Kenya Industrial Property Institute (KIPI).35 
Out of these, 557 were filed under PCT. This translated into 77% of patents. 
Mobile Connectivity Index
The number of mobile subscriptions (SIM Cards) in the country stood at 53.2 million as at 
30th September 2019,36 which translates to a mobile penetration rate of 112.0 percent. This 
upward trajectory of mobile penetration can be attributed to the availability of mobile signals, 
and diverse traditional mobile services. The population covered by 2G and 3G is 96 percent 
and 93 percent respectively.37 
Initiatives that aim to close access gaps in voice infrastructure and school broadband connectivity 
projects have been carried out under the Universal Service Fund (USF). Others include the 
enforcement of operator’s license obligations and licensing of supplementary frequencies that 
support mobile services. All these are spearheaded by the sector regulator, the Communications 
Authority. 
Over the past few years, the Internet market in the country has continued to show positive growth. 
The number of data and Internet subscriptions has grown to 52 million, with 48.5 percent (25.2 
million subscriptions) being broadband. Several factors are attributed to this growth. They include 
the expansion of 3G and 4G coverage, availability of low cost smartphones and cheap data 
plans, the rise in utilization of e-commerce, e-government, social media and online content.38 
34 KENINVEST. Kenya ranked top tech hub in Sub-saharan Africa. August 15, 2019. http:/ /www.invest.go.ke/kenya-ranked-
top-tech-hub-sub-saharan-africa/
35 VICTOR Nzomo. Do patents utility models encourage innovations in Kenya? March 17 , 2017 . Centre for Intellectual Property 
and Information Technology Law (CIPIT). https:/ /blog.cipit.org/2017 /03/13/new-cipit-research-do-patents-utility-models-
encourage-innovation-in-kenya/#comments
36 Communications Authority of Kenya. FIRST QUARTER SECTOR STATISTICS REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 
( JULY - SEPTEMBER 2019). https://ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q1-2019-2020.pdf
37 Ibid
38 Ibid
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
36
ICT Development  Indicators
Contextual indicators: Findings
2E-Commerce
Kenya’s Digital Economy Blueprint aims to provide a conceptual framework to guide the realisation 
of a sustainable digital economy.39 It also highlights the importance of investing in a digital 
economy. The country is one of the world’s leading proponents of financial inclusion that has 
seen the proliferation of digital finance and payment platforms such as Mpesa, Mula, PesaLink 
and Pesapal gain wide usage in the country.40 The increased adoption of these technologies 
continues to facilitate transactions and therefore enhance trade for individuals and small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
In addition, the country has a high number of active mobile money subscribers, and agents 
who by the end of 2019 stood at 31.2 million, and 235.168 respectively.41 Towards the end 
of 2019, 425.3 million mobile trading transactions valued at Kenya shillings 1.6 trillion were 
spent on online purchases of goods and services.42 
The 2016 Networked Readiness Index 2016 ranked Kenya at position 86, with a value of 
3.8.43 Further, Kenya was ranked 89th in the UNCTAD B2C E-commerce Index, 2018. However, 
it was among the top ten African countries in the index, ranking seventh Mauritius, Nigeria, 
South Africa, Tunisia, Morocco and Ghana.44 Further, producing and retaining higher level ICT 
skills needs a measured approach to complete the picture in the business end user environment. 
With regard to market demand, in both the business and residential segments, there is relatively 
good uptake of various ICT services though costs (of devices and some services), quality and 
access (last mile and backhaul) still hold back citizens and businesses from more wholesome 
consumption of ICT. 
Overall, given the considerable actions taken by the government in the ICT sector over the last 
four to five years, which are starting to bear fruit, there is still great opportunity to address some 
issues including ICT skills, access (to devices and services), costs (of devices and services) and 
generally nurture increased usage among both businesses and residents. In some instances, 
the interventions recommended by IDC include easy to execute awareness campaigns while 
others touch on existing plans by the sector regulator (Universal Access Fund and subsidies) and 
multistakeholder intervention (academia, government and business in revising ICT curricular, 
collaborating through various PPPs, etc).
39 Digital Economy BluePrint: Powering Kenya’s Transformation. https:/ /www.ict.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Kenya-
Digital-Economy-2019.pdf
40 Ibid
41 Communications Authority of Kenya. FIRST QUARTER SECTOR STATISTICS REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 
(JULY - SEPTEMBER 2019). 
42 Ibid.
43 2016 Networked Readiness Index http:/ /www3.weforum.org/docs/GITR2016/WEF_GITR_Chapter1.1_2016.pdf 
44 UNCTAD B2C E-commerce Index 2018 https:/ /unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/tn_unctad_ict4d12_en.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
37 ICT Development Indicators 
Contextual indicators: Findings
2On ICT skills, the growth of ICT professionals and the levels of skills in Kenya hinges largely on: 
the size and number of both local and international large organizations; the level of maturity 
and sophistication in their ICT setups; and the growth of the SME segment as a key consumer. 
Inherent are concerns on how to retain staff that have acquired extensive experience (after a 
major project), who may need to grow further or use that experience in another organization 
and cannot do so in the local market and therefore elect to seek opportunities outside Kenya. 
On the other hand, in the supply side, some market players that secure windfall opportunities that 
are not likely to recur any time soon, temporarily import skills to implement and manage large 
projects and do so outside any framework that ensures transfer of skills to local professionals. 
Thus, the issue of skills when viewed broadly and at higher cadres, presents a double-edged 
sword that requires a measured approach factoring in the needs of the market, growth of the 
market, and the resulting demand for such skills. 
The changing ecosystem indicates that the various developments in the sector, including a unified 
telecommunications licensing regime, infrastructure developments, and technological advances, 
have caused the local ICT Ecosystem to undergo some metamorphosis that has gradually seen 
the lines blurred between traditional telecom companies and ICT service providers. With voice 
services nearing saturation, coupled with lower tariffs, telcos have been compelled to re-think 
their strategies away from both voice services and the mass market towards data. Kenya’s 
focus should be on infrastructure construction as a starter in the early stages of ICT growth. The 
country’s growth prospects will also rely on digital innovation and digital governance if fast, 
sustained growth is to be achieved.45
45 Global Connectivity Index. Kenya GCI 2019 . https:/ /www.huawei.com/minisite/gci/en/country-profile-ke.html###
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
38
ICT Development Indicators 
Contextual indicators: Findings
240413 
CATEGORY R  
RIGHTSTHEME A  
Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
RA.1 Is there a legal framework for the enjoyment and enforcement of 
human rights  which is consistent with international and regional 
rights agreements, laws and standards, and with the rule of law?
 ▶ Indicator:  Existence of a constitutional or legal framework, including oversight 
arrangements, which is consistent with international and regional rights agreements, 
laws and standards, and evidence that it is respected and enforced by government 
and other competent authorities
The Constitution of Kenya, 2010 provides a comprehensive Bill of Rights in its Chapter 4 which 
is largely derived from and is consistent with international human rights instruments.46 Under 
Article 2(5), it provides that the rules of international law form part of the laws of Kenya, and 
also, under Article 2(6), it states that any treaty or convention ratified by Kenya forms part of 
the laws of Kenya. 
Kenya has signed or ratified several instruments, which these provisions have incorporated 
into the body of law.47 The country is a State Party to: (a) the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights (ICCPR), (b) the International Covenant on Social and Economic Rights 
(ICESR), (c) the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment (CAT), (d) the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women (CEDAW), (e) the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (ICERD), (f) the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), (g) Convention on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and (h) the Optional Protocol to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. 
Likewise, Kenya is a signatory to International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance (CED), and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. 
However, the country has yet to take action on the International Convention on the Protection 
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families; the Optional Protocol to 
46 Constitution of Kenya https:/ /www.wipo.int/edocs/lexdocs/laws/en/ke/ke019en.pdf 
47 United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, ‘United Nations Treaty Database’. Available at: https:/ /tbInternet.ohchr.
org/ _layouts/15/TreatyBodyExternal/Treaty.aspx?CountryID=90&Lang=EN; Status of Ratification: Interactive Dashboard 
https:/ /indicators.ohchr.org/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
42Theme A  Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
Category R – Rights
3the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the Second Optional Protocol to the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty; 
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; 
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women; the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child on a communications procedure; and, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 
At the regional level, Kenya is a member of the African Union. It is also a State Party to the 
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights;48 the Protocol Establishing the Africa Court;49 
the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in 
Africa;50 and, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child.51 Further, Kenya is 
a member of the East African Community, whose Treaty requires adherence to the observance 
of human rights.52 
With regards to oversight, Chapter 10 of the constitution establishes an independent Judiciary. 
Further, under Articles 23 and 165, it grants the High Court jurisdiction to hear and determine 
petitions on the denial, violation or infringement of, or threat to, a right or fundamental freedom 
in the Bill of Rights. In addition, under Article 59, it establishes the Kenya National Human 
Rights Commission (KNCHR)53 and the National Gender and Equality Commission (NGEC)54 to 
promote respect for and compliance with human rights obligations and to monitor and investigate 
complaints relating thereto. Citizens can proceed to the High Court should any of their rights 
be infringed or threatened. Kenya has submitted two Periodic State Reports under the African 
Charter, with the most recent being in November 2015.55 Further, Kenya has submitted three 
reports under the Universal Periodic Review process in May 2010, January 2015 and more 
recently in January 2020.56
48 Ratification Table:- African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights https:/ /www.achpr.org/ratificationtable?id=49 
49 African Union, List of Countries which have Signed, Accepted or Ratified the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights on the Establishment of an African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights. Available at: https:/ /au.int/sites/
default/files/treaties/36393-sl-protocol_to_the_african_charter_on_human_and_peoplesrights_on_the_estab.pdf 
50 List of Countries which have Signed, Ratified/Acceded to the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on 
the Rights of Women in Africa, available at:https:/ /au.int/sites/default/files/treaties/37077-sl-PROTOCOL%20TO%20THE%20
AFRICAN%20CHARTER%20ON%20HUMAN%20AND%20PEOPLE%27S%20RIGHTS%20ON%20THE%20RIGHTS%20
OF%20WOMEN%20IN%20AFRICA.pdf 
51 List of Countries which have Signed, Ratified/Acceded to the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, available 
at:https:/ /au.int/sites/default/files/treaties/36804-sl-AFRICAN%20CHARTER%20ON%20THE%20RIGHTS%20AND%20
WELFARE%20OF%20THE%20CHILD.pdf 
52 Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community https:/ /eacj.org/?page_id=33 
53 Kenya National Commission on Human Rights https:/ /www.knchr.org/ 
54 National Gender and Equality Commission https:/ /www.ngeckenya.org/ 
55 Kenya https:/ /www.achpr.org/states/detail?id=25 
56 Universal Periodic Review - Kenya https:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/KEindex.aspx 
43
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme A Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Category R – Rights
3RA.2 Is there a legal framework which recognizes that the same rights 
that people have offline must also be protected online?
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence that the principle of online/offline equivalence is accepted 
and implemented in law and practice
While not explicit on the medium, Article 33 of the constitution provides generally for the right to 
freedom of expression. Article 34 guarantees the freedom of electronic, print and all other types 
of media; Article 35 provides for the right of access to information; while Article 36 provides for 
the right to freedom of association. These provisions do not limit their application to the online 
sphere, in which case, they can be interpreted as having both offline and online equivalence 
and application. Further, Kenya is also a member of the Freedom Online Coalition57 which is a 
group of governments committed to working together to support and promote Internet freedom 
and protect fundamental human rights such as freedom of expression, association, assembly 
and privacy online.
THEME B  
Freedom of Expression
RB.2 Are any restrictions on freedom of expression narrowly defined, 
transparent and implemented in accordance with international 
rights agreements, laws and standards?
 ▶ Indicator: Legal restrictions on freedom of expression that are consistent with 
international and regional rights agreements, laws and standards, and evidence that 
these are respected by government and other competent authorities.
The legal threshold for the limitation of the fundamental freedoms contained in the Bill of Rights 
is found in Article 24 of the constitution. The provision lays down the parameters for the lawful 
limitation of fundamental rights and freedoms provided for in the Bill of Rights. Under this 
provision, a right can only be limited pursuant to a prescribed law, and only to the extent that 
57 Freedom Online Coalition https:/ /freedomonlinecoalition.com/about-us/members/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
44Theme B  Freedom of Expression
Category R – Rights
3the limitation is reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic society based on human 
dignity, equality and freedom, taking into account all relevant factors. 
Further, a more specific limitation of the right to freedom of expression is found under Article 33(2), 
which provides that the right does not extend to: propaganda for war, incitement to violence, 
and hate speech or advocacy for hatred on ethnic grounds or any ground of discrimination 
specified in Article 27(4) of the Constitution. 
Further to this, some Statutes provide specific limitations to the right to freedom of expression. For 
example, section 35(3)(c) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2012 limits the rights to freedom 
of expression, media, conscience, religion, belief, and opinion to the extent necessary to 
prevent the commission of an offence under the Act.58 Likewise, Section 33(1) of the National 
Intelligence Service Act, 2012 limits freedom of expression to the extent that it is done: in the 
interest of national security, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; for the 
purpose of protecting the integrity of Service operations; to protect the reputation, rights and 
freedoms of the members or private persons concerned in legal proceedings; to prevent the 
disclosure of information received in confidence; to regulate the technical administration or 
the technical operation of telecommunication, wireless broadcasting, communication, Internet, 
satellite communication or television; or for the security and protection of information within the 
Service. The National Cohesion and Integration Act, 2008 defines the offence of hate speech 
and provides for various penalties to stop its spread.59 
There have been instances where statute limitations on freedom of expression have exceeded 
constitutional parameters, and the courts have been petitioned to stop the violations. In the case 
of Geoffrey Andare v Attorney General & 2 others,60 the High Court of Kenya held that section 
29 of the Kenya Information Communication Act was unconstitutional for violating Article 33 of 
the Constitution. The section provided that:
“a person who by means of a licensed telecommunication system: sends a message 
or other matter that is grossly offensive or of an indecent, obscene or menacing 
character; or sends a message that he knows to be false for the purpose of causing 
annoyance, inconvenience or needless anxiety to another person, commits an offence 
and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand shillings, or 
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or to both.” 
58 Prevention of Terrorism Act http:/ /www.vertic.org/media/National%20Legislation/Kenya/KE_Prevention_Terrorism_Act.pdf 
59 National Cohesion and Integration Act http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/
NationalCohesionandIntegrationAct_No12of2008.pdf 
60 Geoffrey Andare v Attorney General & 2 others , Petition No.149 of 2015 [2016] eKLR, available at: http:/ /kenyalaw.org/
caselaw/cases/view/121033/ 
45
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme B Freedom of Expression 
Category R – Rights
3Similarly, in the case of Jacqueline Okuta & Another v Attorney General & 2 others,61 the 
High Court found the offence of criminal defamation under section 194 of the Penal Code 
unconstitutional as it violated Article 33 of the Constitution as well as regional and international 
standards of freedom of expression such as the United Nations Human Rights Committee General 
Comment No. 47 and Resolution 160 of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights 
adopted on 24 November 2010.
Enjoyment of freedom of expression continues to face challenges. This is largely with respect 
to the expression of political opinions, criticism of government and calls for accountability of 
government in relation to official corruption and human rights violations. The government has 
enforced censorship through the use of threats and intimidation; the use of the Penal Code, 
Non-governmental organizations Coordination Act and the Prevention of Terrorism Act, and, the 
surveillance of mobile62 and Internet communications.63
In 2019, the National Cohesion and Integration Commission condemned publication of photos 
by blogger Robert Alai of Administration Police Officers who were killed in Wajir following 
a terror attack.64 The National Police Service stated that the act was unpatriotic, uncouth and 
disrespectful to the family of the departed officers. Alai bowed to pressure and took down the 
photos.
RB.4 Under what conditions does the law hold platforms and other 
online service providers liable for content published or shared by 
users on them?
 ▶ Indicator: Legal framework for intermediary liability and content regulation is 
consistent with international and regional rights agreements, laws and standards, 
and evidence concerning proportionality of implementation
Kenya does not have a specific legal and policy regime for intermediary liability, especially for 
online content. However, several legislation such as: the Kenya Information and Communication 
61 Jacqueline Okuta & Another v Attorney General and 2 Others , Petition Number 397 of 2016 [2017] eKLR, available at: 
http:/ /kenyalaw.org/caselaw/cases/view/130781/ 
62 Freedom House report 2018 Available at: https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2018/kenya
63 Freedom House Report 2019 Available at: https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/2019/kenya
64 Mireri Junior, ‘NCIC condemns circulation of gruesome photos of Wajir attack victims’, (17 June 2019, Standard Digital) 
available at: https:/ /www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2001330283/ncic-condemns-circulation-of-gruesome-photos-of-wajir-
attack-victims
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
46Theme B Freedom of Expression 
Category R – Rights
3Act,65 Sexual Offences Act,66 National Cohesion and Integration Act 2008,67Prevention of 
Terrorism Act 201268 provide for circumstances where intermediaries may be found liable for 
content on their platforms, especially where the term “distribution” as used in the laws is widely 
interpreted.
THEME C  
Right of Access to Information
RC.2 Does the government block or filter access to the Internet as a 
whole or to specific online services, applications or websites, and 
on what grounds and with what degree of transparency is this 
exercised?
 ▶ Indicator: Legal framework for blocking or filtering Internet access, including 
transparency and oversight arrangements
The right of access information is guaranteed under Article 35 of the constitution. Therefore, 
every citizen has the right of access to information held by the state, and information held by 
another person required for the exercise or protection of any right or fundamental freedom. The 
state is also obligated to publish and publicize information of public importance. The Access 
to Information Act, 201669 provides the framework for public and private entities to access 
and disclose information on request subject to constitutional principles. However, certain types 
of information cannot be disclosed.70 The Act provides for an appeal mechanism, within thirty 
days of a public entity’s decision on an access to information request to the Office of the 
Ombudsman.71
65 s.29-improper use of a computer system to send obscene or false information meant to cause annoyance, s.30 -intentional 
modification or interference of the contents of a message, s.31- disclosure and interception of messages outside the cause of 
ordinary business.
66 s.12 distribution or display of any article that promotes sexual offence with a child, s.14-prints or publishes any information 
intended to facilitate child sex tourism and s.16 distribution of child pornography. 
67 s.62(2) racial or ethnic contempt by newspaper, radio station or media enterprise that publishes utterances that incite violence, 
hatred or discrimination against any person.
68 s.27-publication, distribution of information intending to incite person(s) to carry out a terrorist act.
69 Access to Information Act No.36 of 2016, available at: http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/
AccesstoInformationActNo31of2016.pdf 
70 ibid section 6.
71 ibid section 14.
47
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme C  Right of Access to Information
Category R – Rights
3There is no specific legislation that permits the blocking or filtering of the Internet or specific 
online services, applications or websites. Kenya’s constitution provides several safeguards to 
ensure the realization of human rights. Further, Article 10 requires government officials to apply 
the national values and principles of governance such as human rights, integrity, transparency, 
and the rule of law, whenever they make public policy decisions.
However, there are a number of laws that could potentially be used as a basis to filter access 
to the Internet or to specific online services, applications or websites. Article 58 and 132(4)(d) 
of the constitution provide that a state of emergency can be declared by the National Assembly 
when the State is threatened by war, invasion, general insurrection, disorder, natural disaster 
or other public emergency for a maximum of 14 days. In such an instance, certain rights may 
be limited. However, the declaration must specify the right limited, and the limitation must be 
strictly required for the emergency. 
At the statute level, the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2012 under section 35, provides for the 
limitation of the right to privacy, freedom of expression, the media and of conscience, religion, 
belief and opinion to the extent of preventing the commission of an offence under the Act. This 
is done for the purpose of carrying out an investigation of a terrorist act; the detection and 
prevention of a terrorist act; or that the enjoyment of the rights and fundamental freedoms by an 
individual does not prejudice the rights and fundamental freedom of others. These could lead to 
the limitation of access to the Internet for persons being investigated under the Act. 
Also, section 4 of the Preservation of Public Security Act empowers the President to make 
regulations censoring, controlling or prohibiting the communication of any information, or of 
any means of communicating or of recording ideas or information, including any publication or 
document, and the prevention of the dissemination of false reports in order to preserve public 
security. This could lead to the limitation of access to the Internet. 
Moreover, section 47 of the National Police Service Act limits the right to freedom of expression 
for police officers to the extent of protecting classified information. The National Intelligence 
Service Act under section 33(1) limits the freedom of expression of a member of the service for 
among others, the security and protection of information within the Service.
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence in government and court decisions, and from other credible 
and authoritative sources, concerning blocking or filtering of access
There have been incidences where national regulators have intervened to stop the sharing of 
information online. In September 2012, the Communications Authority issued guidelines to 
mobile network operators and other communications licensees in order to prevent dissemination 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
48Theme C Right of Access to Information 
Category R – Rights
3of political inflammatory messages.72 Likewise, in June 2017, the Kenya Films Classifications 
Board banned select children’s television shows from being broadcasted on the web and TV 
broadcasts for ostensibly promoting homosexuality in violation of “moral values.73 
 ▶ Indicator: Incidence, nature and basis for shutdowns or other restrictions on 
Internet connectivity
Kenya has not had instances where there have been Internet shutdowns. However, there is some 
evidence of restrictions of Internet access. In March 2017, the Centre for Intellectual Property and 
Information Technology Law discovered middle-boxes in Safaricom’s network.74 The report noted 
that middle-boxes have dual use including legitimate purposes such as network optimization and 
traffic manipulation as well as surveillance and censorship. However, Safaricom’s technical team 
denied the presence of middle-boxes on their networks, and two days later, a test conducted on 
the Safaricom networks showed the absence of middle-boxes. 
Ahead of the 2017 general election, speculation was rife that the government would resort 
to blocking the Internet to prevent hate speech on social media platforms.75 Civil society 
organizations advocated for an open Internet even ahead of elections76 and Kenya ICT Action 
Network gave a legal and policy analysis against an Internet shutdown during elections in 
Kenya.77 In January 2018, the government imposed a two-week shutdown of live broadcasts 
of major media houses KTN News, NTV Kenya and Citizen TV after the opposition leader, 
Raila Odinga announced a swearing-in ceremony.78 The online streams of the stations were 
also affected.
72 Communications Commission of Kenya, “Guidelines for the Prevention of Transmission of Undesirable Bulk Political Content/
Message via Electronic Communications Networks”, September 2012, available at: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/Guidelines-on-the-Prevention-of-undesirable-bulk-political-content-via-sms.pdf 
73 https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-net/2017 /kenya; Kenya Films Classification Board, Statement on Children Television 
Programs Promoting Homosexuality in Kenya, 15 June 2017 , available at: http:/ /kfcb.co.ke/wp-content/uploads/2017 /06/
STATEMENT-ON-CHILDREN-TELEVISION-PROGRAMMES-PROMOTING-HOMOSEXUALITY-IN-KENYA-ISSUED-ON-15TH-
JUNE-2017 .pdf 
74 CIPIT Research Brief, Nairobi March 2017 . Available at: https:/ /blog.cipit.org/wp-content/uploads/2017 /03/Final-March-
Brief-pages.pdf
75 Kenneth Odero, “The Kenyan Government Will Only Shut Down the Internet During Elections ‘If Things Get Out Of Hand, 
(17 January 2017 ,iAfrikan) available at: https:/ /www.iafrikan.com/2017 /01/14/the-kenyan-government-will-only-shut-down-
the-Internet-during-elections-if-things-get-out-of-hand/ 
76 AccessNow, “Election Watch: If Kenya Orders an Internet Shutdown will Telcos#KeepItOn”,26 July 2017 , available at: https:/ /
www.accessnow.org/election-watch-kenya-orders-Internet-shutdown-will-telcos-help-keepiton/; sSee also Bloggers Association 
of Kenya, 2017 State of the Internet Report, p. 2, available at: https:/ /www.ifree.co.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/
State-of-the-Internet-in-Kenya-report-2017 .pdf 
77 KICTANet, “Building Trust between the State and its Citizens: A Policy Brief on Internet Shutdowns and Elections in Kenya”, 
available at: https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/wp-content/uploads/2017 /09/Kenya_Policy_Brief_On_Internet_Shutdowns.pdf 
78 Footprints of peace https:/ /www.cohesion.or.ke/images/docs/FOOTPRINTS-OF-NCIC.compressed.pdf 
49
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme C Right of Access to Information 
Category R – Rights
3 ▶ Indicator: Numbers and trend of content access restrictions, takedowns of 
domain names and other interventions during the past three years
There have been few reported incidences of content access restrictions, takedown of domain names 
during the past three years. In May 2011, a website safaricon.co.ke created by a disgruntled 
Safaricom customer to complain about Safaricom network services was taken down amidst claims 
that the takedown happened without Kenya Network Information Centre (KENIC) following due 
process.79 In December 2015, the website IsUhuruInKenya.co.ke, which informed Kenyans whether 
President Uhuru Kenyatta was in the country, was taken down.80 KENIC confirmed that the domain 
name was taken down, and remains inactive to date.81 It is worth noting that there is a growing 
number of takedowns on social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter, Google and Instagram. 
Unfortunately, these individual takedown requests of content, including for the violation of community 
standards are not reported on by the Internet intermediaries.
RC.4 Are individuals, journalists or other online/media actors subject 
to arbitrary detention, prosecution or intimidation for accessing 
information online?
 ▶ Indicator: Scope and nature of legal provisions and practice
The Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act, 2018 penalizes unauthorized access.82Additionally, 
unauthorized access in order to intercept data being held by the government is an offence 
carrying a maximum imprisonment of 10 years or a maximum fine of five million Kenya shillings 
or both. Currently, there are no publicly reported cases of persons who have been arrested or 
detained under the provisions of this Act. 
 ▶ Indicator: Numbers of arbitrary detentions and prosecutions for access to content 
that is not illegitimate in terms of international agreements as to the circumstances 
and criteria for permissible restrictions.
There have been no reported incidents of arrests, prosecution or intimidation for accessing 
illegitimate content. The approach by the government has been largely to arrest, prosecute or 
intimidate the publishers of such content, and not those who seek to access the same.
79 Safaricon.co.ke: Safaricom “Bullies” Registrar, Domainer into taking down domain name http:/ /domainsafrica.blogspot.
com/201 1/09/safariconcoke-safaricom-bullies.html 
80 IsUhuruInKenya.co.ke is back https:/ /techcabal.com/2015/12/08/isuhuruinkenya-co-ke-is-back/ 
81 KENIC Confirms Takedown of isUhuruInKenya.co.ke Domain https:/ /techweez.com/2015/12/07 /isuhuruinkenya-taken-down/ 
82 section 15(1), Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act, 2018, available at: https:/ /au.int/sites/default/files/treaties/36804-
sl-AFRICAN%20CHARTER%20ON%20THE%20RIGHTS%20AND%20WELFARE%20OF%20THE%20CHILD.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
50Theme C Right of Access to Information 
Category R – Rights
3 THEME D  
Freedom of Association and the Right to take 
part in the Conduct of Public Affairs
RD.2 Can non-governmental organizations organize freely online?
 ▶ Indicator:  Evidence of online organization, and absence of undue interference 
with such organization
Given that freedom of association is guaranteed under Article 36 of the constitution organizations 
are at liberty to organize online. Several organizations have websites, social media accounts, 
and online presence, where they engage freely. However, there have been instances where the 
government has interfered with the operations of non-governmental organizations. 
In December 2014, the government shut down more than 500 non-governmental organizations, 
including 15 groups in claimed had links to financing terrorism.83 The claim was dismissed by civil 
society groups as a move aimed at silencing critics under the guise of ensuring security. Several 
appeared to be Christian organisations, aid agencies, orphanages, or organisations working in 
health and development closed for failing to provide financial audit returns.84 In August 2017, 
the NGO Coordination Board purported to deregister the Kenya Human Rights Commission 
(KHRC) and the Africa Centre for Open Governance (AFRICOG) for among others, operating 
illegally and non-payment of taxes.85 The organizations protested the move stating that it was 
illegal and unconstitutional, aimed at punishing for criticising the government. Again in October 
2017, the NGO Coordination Board ordered the immediate shutdown of the International Law 
Development Organization (IDLO) offices in Nairobi and asked that all active operations and 
programmes in Kenya be stopped immediately.86
Section 46 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2012 permits the Cabinet Secretary, where he 
has reasonable grounds to believe that a registered company or association or an applicant 
for registration as a company or association has made or is likely to make available, directly or 
83 Kenya shuts down 500 groups in anti-terrorism crackdown https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-kenya-security-ngos/kenya-
shuts-down-500-groups-in-anti-terrorism-crackdown-idUSKBN0JU21J20141216 
84 Kenya closes down hundreds of NGOS https:/ /www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2014/12/kenya-closes-down-hundreds-
ngos-20141216124722577348.html 
85 NGOs: We were shut over plan to contest poll result in court https:/ /www.nation.co.ke/news/NGOs--We-were-shut-over-
plan-to-contest-poll-result-in-court-/1056-40591 14-jc5pvc/index.html 
86 Supreme backlash: State shuts down international NGO with links to the Judiciary https:/ /www.standardmedia.co.ke/
article/2001256610/supreme-backlash-state-shuts-down-international-ngo-with-links-to-the-judiciary 
51
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme D  Freedom of Association and the Right to take part in the Conduct of Public Affairs
Category R – Rights
3indirectly, any resources in support of a terrorist group, issue an order which if allowed by the 
High Court, can result in the deregistration or non-registration of the association. In June 2015, 
the High Court barred the government from declaring two prominent human rights organisations 
terrorist groups.87 The government had accused Haki Africa and Muslims for Human Rights 
(MUHURI) of having links to Islamist group al-Shabab and subsequently frozen their accounts.
RD.3 Are there government policies for e-government and/or 
e-participation that encourage participation in government and 
public processes?
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of government policies for e-government and e-participation, 
including use of the Internet for public consultation
Kenya’s E-Government Strategy was adopted in 200488 and it aims to use Information 
Communication Technologies for better public service delivery. 
Moreover, the government has implemented several e-government programmes. The Integrated 
Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) is an automated system used for public financial 
management89 which was first introduced in 200390 and is now linked to an e-Procurement 
system to streamline procurement processes throughout the 47 county governments.91 The system 
seeks to enhance transparency and accountability in the procurement process from procurement 
planning, requisition, sourcing, and to payment.92 
The Integrated Payroll and Personnel Database (IPPD) has been used to manage the national 
government payroll and personnel database since its adoption in 1997.93 The Kenya Revenue 
Authority utilizes an online platform, iTax, to facilitate the filing and paying of taxes.94 In 2018, 
87 Kenya court rules Haki Africa and MHR not terrorists https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-33092786 
88 Republic of Kenya, ‘E-Government Strategy: The Strategic Framework, Administrative Structure, Training Requirements and 
Standardization Framework’, March 2004. Available at: http:/ /www.ict.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/KENYA-E-
GOVERNMENT-STRATEGY-2004.pdf
89 Ministry of Finance, “What is IFMIS?”
90 ICPAK, “The Benefits,Challenges and Way Forward of IFMIS in Kenya”, 27–28 June 2017 p.9, available at: https:/ /www.
icpak.com/wp-content/uploads/2017 /07 /The-benefits-Challenges-and-way-forward-of-IFMIS-in-Kenya.pdf 
91 IFMIS e-Procurement Rolled out throughout the Country to Enhance Service Delivery to the public, available at: http:/ /www.
treasury.go.ke/media-centre/news-updates/224-ifmis-e-procurement-rolled-out-throughout-the-country-to-enhance-service-
delivery-to-the-public.html 
92 ibid.
93 Ministry of State for Public Service, Integrated Payroll And Personnel Database (Ippd) Initiative, available at: http:/ /unpan1.
un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/AAPAM/UNPAN032705.pdf 
94 ‘KRA to Accelerate Policy Reforms as Kenya Named Technology-Driven Revenue Administration’ (CIO East Africa, November 
15 2017), available at: https:/ /www.cio.co.ke/kra-accelerate-policy-reforms-kenya-named-technology-driven-revenue-
administration/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
52Theme D Freedom of Association and the Right to take part in the Conduct of Public Affairs 
Category R – Rights
3the platform had enlisted 5.73 million taxpayers up from 4.2 million the previous year.95 The 
World Bank Ease of Doing Business recognized Kenya for simplifying its tax and other regulatory 
procedures and thereby making it easier to start a business.96
The National Land Information Management System aims to develop a transparent, decentralized, 
affordable, effective and efficient GIS based Land Information Management System.97 In April 
2018, the Ministry of Lands and Physical Planning formally rolled out the system which is capable 
of performing several types of transactions relating to land.98 
The National Education Management Information System (NEMIS) is a web-based data 
management solution which facilitates the collection of data and information from education 
institutions; processes and reports the status of designed indicators. Additionally, the online 
platform captures school and learner information, facilitates data sharing between all education 
agencies, tracks costing parameters of education and training, geographical analysis of 
education indicators with integration of GIS components and business intelligence by providing 
statistics for reporting national and international indicators in education and training sub-sectors.99
The Health Information System (HIS) is a proposed system under the Kenya Health Information 
Policy for collection, presentation and analysis of health and health-related data and its 
conveyance to higher levels in the healthcare system.100 Additionally, HIS is expected to facilitate 
evidence-based decision-making, especially at the point of collection. 
 ▶ Indicator: Values/rankings in UNDESA’s e-participation index
According to the United Nations E-Government Survey of 2018, Kenya scored a middle 
E-Government Development Index of 0.4541.101 Kenya is ranked 122102 and 110103 in the 
United Nations e-Government Development Index and E-Participation Index, respectively.
95 ibid.
96 World Bank, Doing Business 2018: Reforming to Create Jobs, p.35 available at: http:/ /documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/803361509607947633/pdf/12081 1-REVISED-PUBLIC.pdf 
97 Vision 2030, Second Medium Plan Term 2013-2017 Plan p.29, available at: http:/ /vision2030.go.ke/inc/uploads/2018/06/
Second-Medium-Term-Plan-2013-2017 .pdf 
98 Lands Ministry to roll out a new Land Information Management System (LIMS), https:/ /lands.go.ke/lands-ministry-to-roll-out-a-
new-land-information-management-system-lims/ 
99 Ministry of Education, National Education Management Information System, available at: http:/ /nemis.education.go.ke/
Login.aspx 
100 Republic of Kenya, Health Information System Policy, available at: http:/ /www.nationalplanningcycles.org/sites/default/
files/country_docs/Kenya/health_information_system_policy.pdf 
101 United Nations E-Government Survey of 2018: Gearing E-Government to Support Transformation towards Sustainable and 
Resilient Societies, p.230. Available at: https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/Portals/egovkb/Documents/un/2018-
Survey/E-Government%20Survey%202018_FINAL%20for%20web.pdf 
102 United Nations e-Government Development Index https:/ /www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/E-Government%20Survey%20
2018_FINAL.pdf 
103 2020 E-Government Development Index. https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/Data-Center 
53
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme D Freedom of Association and the Right to take part in the Conduct of Public Affairs 
Category R – Rights
3THEME E  
The Right to Privacy
RE.2 Is the protection of personal data guaranteed in law and enforced 
in practice, with respect to governments, businesses and other 
organizations, including rights of access to information held and to 
redress?
 ▶ Indicator: Legal framework for data protection, including monitoring mechanisms 
and means of redress, and evidence that it is respected and enforced by government 
and other competent authorities
The right to privacy is protected under Article 31 of the constitution which guarantees every 
person the right not to have their person, home or property searched; their possessions seized; 
information relating to their family or private affairs unnecessarily required or revealed; or the 
privacy of their communications infringed. Further to this, the recently enacted Data Protection 
Act 2019, gives effect to the right to privacy and establishes a legal and institutional framework 
to safeguard the right to privacy and protect personal data.
In addition, there are other relevant legislation that protect personal data. These include the: 
Banking Act; Credit Reference Bureau Regulations; Capital Markets Act; Access to Information Act; 
Private Security Regulation Act; and the Officials Secrets Act. Others include Kenya Information 
and Communications (Consumer Protection) Regulations, 2010 which protects consumers’ rights 
to personal privacy and protection against unauthorized use of personal information.104 ICT 
Regulations under the Elections Act requires the Electoral Commission to conduct audits to ensure 
data integrity.105
Save for where the right is limited, there is general compliance with the right. Where there have 
been breaches, the courts have been clear in safeguarding the right. For example, in April 
2017, the High Court held that the decision of Communications Authority of Kenya to install a 
Device Management System software, which had surveillance capabilities, in mobile phones 
was unconstitutional, as if used, it would amount to a breach of the right to privacy to mobile 
service subscribers.106
104 Kenya Information and Communications (Consumer Protection) Regulations, 2010, Regulation 3(d). Available at: http:/ /
kenyalaw.org/LegalNotices/pop_ln.php?file=392
105 Regulation 1 1 
106 Okiya Omtatah Okoiti v Communication Authority of Kenya & 8 others, Constitutional Petition No.53 of 2017 , [2018] eKLR, 
available at:http:/ /kenyalaw.org/caselaw/cases/view/151 1 17 / 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
54Theme E  The Right to Privacy
Category R – Rights
3 ▶ Indicator: Legal framework concerning the commercial use of personal data and 
international data transfer/security, including monitoring mechanisms and means 
of redress
The use of personal data for commercial purposes is prohibited under section 37 (1) of the 
Data Protection Act, 2019107 unless the express consent of the data subject has been sought 
and obtained, or the use is authorized under the law and the data subject has been informed 
of such use when collecting the data from them. Further, data controllers or data processors 
that use personal data for commercial purposes are required where possible, to anonymise the 
data in such a manner as to ensure that the data subject is no longer identifiable. The law also 
requires the Cabinet Secretary, in consultation with the Data Commissioner, to prescribe practice 
guidelines for the commercial use of personal data in accordance with the Act. Any person 
aggrieved by the actions of a data processor or controller may make a complaint to the Data 
Protection Commissioner for redress. 
The Act in section 48 allows transfer data to another country where a data controller or 
processor has: given proof to the Data Commissioner on the appropriate safeguards to security 
and protection of the data, existence of appropriate safeguards in the jurisdiction such as 
commensurate laws; and where the transfer is deemed necessary for example for contractual 
purposes, in the public interest, defence of a legal claim, protection of the rights of a data 
subject, or for compelling legitimate interests of eh data controller or processor, not overridden 
by the rights of the data subject. 
Under Part 8 of the Act, a person aggrieved may make a complaint to the Data Protection 
Commissioner, who is empowered to investigate and may issue penalty notices to a person found 
to be in breach of the Act. A penalty notice is up to a sum of five million shillings, or in the case 
of an undertaking, up to one per centum of its annual turnover of the preceding financial year, 
whichever is lower. Moreover, a person who suffers damage resulting from the contravention of 
the Act is entitled to compensation from the data controller or processor A person aggrieved by 
any administrative action of the Data Protection Commissioner may appeal to the High Court. 
 ▶ Indicator: Existence and powers of an independent data protection authority or 
similar entity
The Data Protection Act, 2019 establishes the Office of the Data Protection Commissioner as an 
independent body in the exercise of its powers and the carrying out of its functions.108 Its functions 
include maintaining a register of data controllers and processes, overseeing the implementation 
107 Data Protection Act 2019 http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/2019/TheDataProtectionAct__No24of2019.
pdf
108 Data Protection Act, s.8.
55
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme E The Right to Privacy 
Category R – Rights
3of the Act, receiving and investigating complaints among other functions. The Office of the Data 
Protection Commissioner is empowered to conduct dispute resolution proceedings, summon 
witnesses and seek professional assistance to perform its functions.109 However, the office of 
the Data Protection Commissioner is yet to be established.
RE.3 Are the powers of law enforcement and other agencies for the 
lawful interception of user data necessary, proportionate and 
limited to circumstances which are consistent with international 
and regional rights agreements, laws and standards?
 ▶ Indicator: Legal framework for the lawful interception of data, including 
independent oversight and transparency, and evidence concerning implementation 
by government and other competent authorities
The right to privacy is limited under sections 36 and 42 of the National Intelligence Service Act 
with respect to a person suspected to have committed an offence; and their communications 
may be investigated, monitored or otherwise interfered with pursuant to a court warrant issued 
by the High Court.110 Section 36 of the National Intelligence Service Act empowers the Service, 
pursuant to a court warrant, to interfere with the right to privacy of a person under investigations. 
Further, section 42 of the Act allows the Service to conduct covert operations and monitor 
communications under the authorization of the Director General. 
Section 36 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2012 grants a police officer of or above the rank 
of Chief Inspector to apply ex parte to the High Court for an interception of communication 
order. Prior to doing so, the consent of the Inspector-General of Police or the Director of Public 
Prosecutions should be obtained. The evidence obtained under such orders is admissible. If 
the police fail to comply with the section, the officer may on conviction be liable to a penalty 
of a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years or a fine not exceeding five million or both. 
Article 22 of the Constitution allows any person whose rights have been infringed or are 
threatened to file a constitutional petition in the High Court to seek redress for the violation of 
their human rights. The challenge with these provisions are that the court orders are granted ex 
parte, and therefore, the person affected may not be aware of the violations by law enforcement 
agencies who are conducting the interception.
109 Ibid at s.9.
110 National Intelligence Service Act, 2012. Available at: https:/ /www.nis.go.ke/downloads/THE%20NATIONAL%20
INTELLIGENCE%20SERVICE%20ACT,%202012.pdf
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
56Theme E The Right to Privacy 
Category R – Rights
3THEME F  
Social, Economic and Cultural Rights
RF.1 Do government policies incorporate the Internet in strategies 
concerned with employment, health and education, with 
particular reference to ICESCR rights?
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence of inclusion of a) the Internet, and b) respect for ICESCR rights, 
in sector strategies for employment, health and education.
Economic and social rights are provided for under Article 43 of the Constitution. Article 43(1)
(a) of the Constitution provides for the right of every person to the highest attainable standard 
of health, which includes the right to health care services, including reproductive health care. 
The Ministry of Health has tested various online initiatives, for example, telemedicine and is 
currently in the process of coordinating and integrating all its medical activities with the plan of 
the national healthcare policy. The e-Health policy will guarantee consistency with the National 
IT/ICT and National e-government policy infrastructure. Moreover, section 103 of the Health 
Act, 2017 recognizes e-health as a mode of health service.111 Further, it requires the Cabinet 
Secretary responsible for health to enact legislation by the year 2020, to provide for among 
others, health service delivery through M-health, E-learning and telemedicine
The right to education is provided for under Article 43(1)(f) of the Constitution. The government 
has continued to integrate ICT in education programmes112 such as the Digital Literacy Program 
which seeks to provide schools with digital resources for effective curriculum delivery. Internet 
connectivity has been identified as vital in teaching and learning since it ensures access to content, 
collaboration and communication.113 ICT has also been used in the administrative aspects of 
education, the National Education Management Information System has effectively streamlined 
the administration of educational institutions.114 It is worth noting that the Communications 
Authority of Kenya, under its Universal Access Program, has connected 887 secondary schools 
across 47 counties to high speed broadband connectivity of 5 mbps.115
111 Health Act 2017 http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/HealthActNo.21of2017 .pdf
112 Ministry of Education, National Education Strategic Plan (2018-2022),p.43, available at: http:/ /www.education.go.ke/
images/NESSP/MOE-NESSP.pdf 
113 p.49, available at: http:/ /www.education.go.ke/images/NESSP/MOE-NESSP.pdf 
114 Ministry of Education, National Education Management Information System, available at: http:/ /nemis.education.go.ke/
Login.aspx 
115 Communications Authority of Kenya, Education Broadband Connectivity Project,available at: https:/ /ca.go.ke/education-
broadband-connectivity-project/ 
57
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme F  Social, Economic and Cultural Rights
Category R – Rights
3With regards to employment, the National Employment Authority has integrated the use of the 
Internet by advertising job vacancies on its website116 as well as launching a special website 
for Kenyans working abroad. The migrant workers website provides important information 
for Kenyans planning to go to work in the Gulf states such as the contacts for the respective 
embassies and how to return back home.117 Another government initiative is the Ajira Digital 
Program under the Ministry of ICT. This program seeks to market Kenya as a labour market 
destination for multinational companies as well as encourage local companies and public sectors 
to create digital work.118
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence of analysis by government of the impact of Internet on 
employment, health and education
The Digital Economy blueprint 2019,119 recognises the role of the digital economy in enhancing 
employment creation in the country. It also analyses the role and impact of education in realising 
the digital economy for the country, noting that “ICT is a key enabler of the social sectors such 
as education, health and agriculture”. The blueprint also notes the high correlation between 
ICTs and SDG progress as 91%, with SDG 4 (Education), SDG 3 (Healthcare) and SDG 9 
(Industry and innovation) having the most potential for ICT-enabled transformation. The blueprint 
also encourages smart societies and networks in major infrastructure areas, such as energy, 
transportation, health, education and public administration.
RF.2 Are all citizens and other individuals equally able to take 
advantage of the Internet to participate in cultural activity?
 ▶ Indicator: Extent and nature of differences in Internet access and use between 
different communities/ethnicities
Internet access is disproportionately distributed in Kenya.120 In 2007, the highest levels of access 
were noted in Nairobi with 80% Internet penetration followed by Coast Province with 9%.121 
Eastern, Western and North Eastern had the least number of Internet customers respectively.122 
In september 2019 statistics from the Communications Authority indicated that the country had 
116 National Employment Authority http:/ /nea.go.ke/web/ 
117 Kenya Migrant Worker https:/ /kenyamigrantworker.org/ 
118 Ajira Digital https:/ /ajiradigital.go.ke/about_ajira 
119 Digital Economy Blueprint https:/ /www.ict.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Kenya-Digital-Economy-2019.pdf 
120 Internet Market Analysis Report 2007 , Communication Commission of Kenya, https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/
Final-Internet-market-analysis-report.pdf 
121 Ibid at p.8
122 ibid.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
58Theme F Social, Economic and Cultural Rights 
Category R – Rights
352 million Internet subscriptions, of which 51.6 million were from mobile data subscriptions.123 
Mobile penetration in the country is high at 112 percent. 
However, these statistics do not indicate the distribution of Internet users in different demographics 
or geographic areas, which are occupied by people from different communities. Despite mobile 
penetration being high, there still exists a digital divide between rural and urban areas. These 
can be attributed to the lack of electricity and Internet infrastructure outside major cities and urban 
areas, and the high cost of Internet services and Internet-enabled devices.124
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of government policy concerning cultural heritage online
Article 11 of the Constitution recognizes culture as the foundation of the nation. It obligates the 
state to promote all forms of national and cultural expression through literature, the arts, traditional 
celebrations, science, communication, information, mass media, publications, libraries and other 
cultural heritage. The state is also required to recognize the role of science and indigenous 
technologies in the development of the nation and promote the intellectual property rights of the 
people of Kenya.
In addition, the National ICT Policy 2019 states that the government will encourage the use of 
Kenya’s unique culture and languages to grow the technology ecosystem and elevate businesses 
to compete at a global level.125 The additional measures proposed include supporting locally 
based development of ICT applications and multimedia content; encouraging the use of local 
languages in developing content; encouraging the development of content that captures and 
preserves knowledge and culture of Kenya’s diverse communities; removal of barriers to local 
content creation and distribution such as exorbitant classification fees and broadcasting fees; 
promotion, collection, preservation, digitisation, distribution and publishing of historical community 
materials; and encouraging the development and management of information and knowledge 
resources as a national heritage.
The Communications Authority of Kenya, which regulates broadcasting, requires licensees to 
air 40% of local content which is wholly or partially produced in Kenya and either in Kenya’s 
indigenous languages or the official languages.126 A number of these stations broadcast online on 
platforms such as YouTube, therefore, they aid the initiative of promoting cultural heritage online. 
123 Sector Statistics Report https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q1-2019-2020.pdf
124 Mobile solutions a catalyst for Internet penetration in Kenya https:/ /www.dw.com/en/mobile-solutions-a-catalyst-for-Internet-
penetration-in-kenya/a-47078206 
125 National ICT Policy https:/ /www.ict.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/NATIONAL-ICT-POLICY-2019.pdf
126 Communications Authority of Kenya, “The Programming Code for Free-to-Air Radio/Television Services in Kenya”, 2nd Edition 
March 2016,p.29 available at: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/PROGRAMMING-CODE-FOR-FREE-TO-
AIR-BROADCASTING-MARCH-2016.pdf 
59
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators2 Theme F Social, Economic and Cultural Rights 
Category R – Rights
3 ▶ Indicator: Constitutional or legal guarantee of freedom of artistic expression.
Freedom of artistic expression is recognized under Articles 11 and 33 of the Constitution. Courts 
have also recognized the importance of artistic creativity in Kenya’s political and social history.127 
Artistic expression has been protected even on sensitive themes such as homosexuality, such as a 
recent court decision which lifted a ban on the viewing of “Rafiki”, which had a gay theme.128
Nonetheless, freedom of artistic expression is limited under sections 3 to 10 of the Films and 
Stage Plays Act. These provisions set out licensing requirements for making films except where the 
film is exempted under section 10 by the licensing Officer. A filmmaker must make an application 
to the Licensing Officer with a full description of the scenes and the full text of the spoken parts 
of the entire film to be made. The licensing officer may refuse or grant a license with or without 
conditions at his discretion.
127 Okiya Omtatah Okoiti V Attorney General & 2 others [2013] eKLR, available at:http:/ /kenyalaw.org/caselaw/cases/
view/87957 
128 Wanuri Kahiu & another v CEO, Kenya Film Classification Board - Ezekiel Mutua & 4 others [2018] eKLR, available at: http:/ /
kenyalaw.org/caselaw/cases/view/158712/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
60Theme F Social, Economic and Cultural Rights 
Category R – Rights
3Policy Recommendations for Various 
Stakeholders
Government
• Government agencies such as the Communications Authority of Kenya should invest in 
research to provide accurate and diverse statistics on Internet use in the country. 
• The government should have a clear cultural heritage policy to fulfill Article 11 of the 
Constitution of Kenya.
• The Films and Stage Plays Act should be reviewed in order to provide oversight of the 
licensing procedures.
• The office of the Data Protection Commissioner should be established to ensure the protection 
of personal data. 
• The Kenya National Human Rights Commission should monitor and report on human rights 
violations online. 
Private Sector
• Embrace and commit to the United Nations Business and Human Rights Principles.
• Develop policies and review their practices to ensure they are rights respecting by design. 
• Collaborate with other stakeholders including civil society to advance human rights within 
their operations. 
• Invest in research and provide statistics on the use of technology, which can be useful for 
decision-making. 
Civil Society
• Monitor and report on the state of digital rights in Kenya.
• Continue to hold the government and the private sector accountable for the state of human 
rights in the country, especially in the digital era. 
• Collaborate with other stakeholders to promote the realisation of human rights online. 
• Raise awareness of the public on their rights online. 
61
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsPolicy recommendations for various stakeholders
23Category R – RightsAcademia
• Conduct more evidence-based research on the use and impact of technology on human 
rights in Kenya.
• Share the findings of critical research more widely to all relevant stakeholders, in particular 
policy makers. 
Individual Users
• Increase their knowledge on their rights in the online context. 
• Monitor the practices of other stakeholders and resist abuse of their rights online and seek 
redress from the appropriate agencies whenever there is a violation. 
Media and Journalists
• Use their platforms to create awareness of the public on their rights online. 
• Monitor and report on the violations or abuses of human rights in the online context. 
• Build their capacity and understanding of human rights, especially in an online context.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsPolicy recommendations for various stakeholdersCategory R – Rights
6264654
CATEGORY O  
OPENNESSTHEME A   
Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
OA.2 Does the legal and regulatory framework for business, academia 
and civil society facilitate innovation on the Internet?
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence concerning the conduciveness of the legal and regulatory 
framework towards the establishment of new business ventures and innovation by 
academia and civil society
Kenya adopted a commercial model in the provision of ICT services. A unified licensing 
framework (ULF) has been adopted under the primary ICT law, the Kenya Information and 
Communications Act (KICA).129 The market structure under the unified licensing framework that 
came into effect from January 2016 created various licences ranging from KES 1,000 (USD 100) 
for licensing of telecommunication personnel, to KES 15 million (USD 15,000). Operators are 
charged annual operating fees KES 4 million (USD 40,000) or 0.4% of annual gross turnover. 
Fees for broadcasting and Internet services are market based.130 
Prior to applying for a communications license, an applicant is required to comply with general 
business and tax registration procedures. These include the Companies Act, Partnerships Act, 
Limited Liability Partnership Act and Registration of Business Act. In 2019, Kenya was ranked 
61 in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Score.131 The score captures the gap of each 
economy from the best regulatory performance observed on indicators such as: starting a 
business; construction permits; getting electricity; registering property; getting credit; protecting 
minority investors; paying taxes; trading across borders; enforcing contracts; and resolving 
insolvency.
129 Communications Authority of Kenya, Unified Licensing Framework available from https:/ /ca.go.ke/industry/telecommunication/
market-structure/ 
130 Communications Authority of Kenya 2016, Market Structure under th e Unified Licensing Framework  https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/New-Market-Structure-Under-The-Unified-Licensing-Framework-January-2016-1.pdf 
131 World Bank 2019, Doing Business in Kenya available from: http:/ /documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/729481541143479565/pdf/WP-DB2019-PUBLIC-Kenya.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
66Theme A  Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
Category O – Openness
4 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions of experience of the regulatory environment for business 
and ICTs by businesses, including Internet-enabled business
While the ULF is flexible from a commercial perspective, the high fees charged are prohibitive 
for non-commercial entities that are community based and social entrepreneurs. Broadcasting 
regulations envisage community radio stations. The licensing procedures provide that one may 
make an application for a community radio license for consideration by the regulator.132
Emerging regulatory challenges in the ICT sector include cross-regulation and regulation of new 
Internet based business models. ICT has been disruptive across many sectors. For example, 
Kenya’s renowned mobile money transfer service, MPesa, is considered both an ICT service as 
well as a financial product. It is therefore co-regulated by the banking sector, telecommunications 
sector and the competition regulators. 
MPesa has developed into a platform upon which products such as payments, digital loans and 
betting are delivered.133 These products are regulated by existing laws on banking, microfinance 
and gambling respectively. However, the government is keen to raise revenue from the services 
and targeted them for taxation in 2018 and 2019. This has resulted in the exit of some betting 
companies from the country following the government’s decision to impose a 10 percent Excise 
Duty on stakes in addition to the betting tax of 15 percent.134
Examples of other Internet related businesses that face uncertainty due to lack of clear regulations 
include cryptocurrencies, global social media networking sites, blogging and vlogging. The 
Central Bank of Kenya, for example, cautioned against cryptocurrencies in December 2015.135
132 Communications Authority of Kenya, Procedure for Broadcasting Service Providers Licence available from https:/ /ca.go.ke/
wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Procedure-For-Licensing-of-Broadcasting-Service-Providers.pdf 
133 Safaricom MPesa API  available from https:/ /www.safaricom.co.ke/business/corporate/m-pesa-payment-services/m-pesa-api 
134 Juma V 2019 ‘SportPesa owners take hit as firm closes Kenya office’ Business Daily 4 October. Available from: https:/ /www.
businessdailyafrica.com/news/SportPesa-owners-take-hit-as-firm-closes/539546-5298170-jmdw4a/index.html 
135 Central Bank of Kenya 2015, Public Notice on Virtual Currencies available from: https:/ /www.centralbank.go.ke/images/
docs/media/Public_Notice_on_virtual_currencies_such_as_Bitcoin.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
67 Theme A Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Category O – Openness
4THEME B  
Open Standards
OB.3 Does the government promote the diversity of intellectual 
property licensing options including free and open-source 
software (FOSS)?
 ▶ Indicator: Government policy towards FOSS and other licensing options
In the formative years of the ICT industry, free and open source software (FOSS) advocates136 
called for the government to adopt FOSS as a standard across government departments. While 
some departments incorporated FOSS, it is not a standard requirement.
The technical layers in digitalization projects such as digital ID, are numerous. For example, 
enrolment is done through biometric readers, the data is stored in databases on the cloud, then 
subsequently analysed using algorithms. Individuals are issued with smart cards that are printed 
according to the technology adopted. These cards are later used to access services at service 
points such as the web or service kiosks, and technology is also employed. In all these processes, 
the safety of data is guaranteed through technologies such as encryption. In the discourse on 
digital ID, the country has been encouraged to adopt technology that is neutral to enhance 
interoperability and prevent vendor lock-in.137
OB.4 Does the government promote and adopt standards to facilitate 
accessibility to the Internet and e-government services for 
persons with disabilities?
 ▶ Indicator: Government policy and practice towards ensuring accessibility for 
persons with disabilities
Kenya has multiple languages spoken in its various regions. The constitution recognizes three 
national languages: English, Swahili and Kenyan Sign Language.138 Under section 15 of the 
136 KICTANet 2016, Ten Years of ICT Policy Making in Kenya. Available from https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/?page_id=401 15# 
137 World Bank 2019 Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development. Available from http:/ /documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/213581486378184357 /Principles-on-identification-for-sustainable-development-toward-the-digital-age 
138 Constitution of Kenya 2010, art.7 http:/ /www.klrc.go.ke/index.php/constitution-of-kenya/108-chapter-two-the-republic/173-
7-national-official-and-other-languages 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
68Theme B  Open Standards
Category O – Openness
4Programming Code, broadcasters are required to “provide sign language insert and subtitles in 
all newscasts and in all programmes covering emergencies and events of national significance to 
facilitate enjoyment of the programming by Persons with Disabilities”.139 A review of broadcasts 
and public announcements shows that newscasts on national free to air television stations and 
on their online channels on YouTube have sign language interpreters. Subtitles are yet to be 
implemented. 
The Constitution also recognizes the rights of persons with disability (PWD)140 and prohibits 
their discrimination.141 This is complemented by the Persons with Disabilities Act142 that among 
other things, provides tax incentives for employers of persons with disabilities in its section 16. 
However, the Act envisages employment in the traditional sense of working in a physical office143 
space and requires review to update it with realities of online work for PWDs. Section 24 of the 
Act also empowers the Council established under the Act to issue adjustment orders to public 
physical spaces that are not conducive for PWDs. Public online spaces such as websites and 
e-government portals are not provided for. 
Kenya’s ICT Policy 2006 in clause 13 outlines measures for creating an accessible environment 
for PWDs through leveraging on ICTs.144 To promote the rights of PWDs, the Universal Service 
Fund has been used to provide Job Access With Speech (JAWS) software for institutions for 
PWDs.145 
 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions of persons with disabilities concerning accessibility policy 
and practice
Persons with disability have not benefited from the capacities offered by ICTs. The Association 
for Accessibility and Equality for example notes that the policy measures outlined in the ICT 
Policy are yet to be enforced.146 More needs to be done to enhance accessibility. For example, 
there is a substantial number of government services now being offered online, with some being 
139 Programming Code for Free-to-Air Radio and Television Services in Kenya 2015 https:/ /kfcb.co.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2016/07 /Programe_code.pdf 
140 Constitution of Kenya 2010, art.54 http:/ /www.klrc.go.ke/index.php/constitution-of-kenya/1 13-chapter-four-the-bill-of-rights/
part-3-specific-application-of-rights/220-54-persons-with-disabilities 
141 Constitution of Kenya 2010, art.27 http:/ /www.klrc.go.ke/index.php/constitution-of-kenya/1 12-chapter-four-the-bill-of-rights/
part-2-rights-and-fundamental-freedoms/193-27-equality-and-freedom-from-discrimination 
142 Persons with Disabilities Act https:/ /www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/docs/ELECTRONIC/69444/1 15499/F923058%20154/
KEN69444%202012.pdf
143 Section 16(2) for example provides for tax rebates for accessibility improvements of physical buildings only. Improvements 
such as purchase of accessibility software and hardware are not explicitly provided for. 
144 Kenya ICT Policy 2006. Available from http:/ /icta.go.ke/national-ict-policy/ 
145 CIPESA 2019, Placing ICT Access for Persons with Disabilities at the Centre of Internet Rights Debate in Kenya available from: 
https:/ /cipesa.org/2019/09/placing-ict-access-for-persons-with-disabilities-at-the-centre-of-Internet-rights-debate-in-kenya/ 
146 Placing ICT access for Persons with Disabilities at the centre of Internet rights debate https:/ /cipesa.org/2019/09/placing-
ict-access-for-persons-with-disabilities-at-the-centre-of-Internet-rights-debate-in-kenya/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
69 Theme B Open Standards 
Category O – Openness
4offered exclusively online. The government websites offering these services do not all contain 
features to support PWDs or those with low digital literacy. PWDs are therefore forced to seek 
the services of intermediaries in order to access these services.
THEME C  
Open Markets
OC.1 Is there independent regulation of communications markets, 
undertaken in accordance with international norms and 
standards?
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of an independent regulatory authority or authorities
There are several government authorities in the ICT sector. The Media Council of Kenya established 
under the Media Council Act oversees compliance with media standards. The Council is meant 
to give effect to the constitutional guarantee on freedom of the media. The Competition Authority 
is mandated with ensuring competition and protection of consumers, including in the ICT sector. 
The laws establishing the authorities state that the authorities shall be independent. To a large 
extent, the Communications Authority has remained fairly independent in functions as well as 
finances. However, the government has been sued147 on several occasions for interfering with 
the recruitment process for the board of the authority.
The Media Council is established under the Media Council of Kenya Act. Its functions include 
promotion and protection of the freedom of the media as well as regulation of journalists, media 
practitioners and media enterprises.148 Its board comprises representatives of bodies in the media 
industry, including editors and journalists associations.149 The Council’s independence has been 
147 See for example: Sunday F, 2016 ‘Communications Authority directors sue government, vow to stay put’ The Standard 14 
February. Available from https:/ /www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2000191600/communications-authority-directors-sue-
government-vow-to-stay-put and Wambulwa A 2019 ‘Court stops Mucheru from appointing new CAK board’ The Star 1May. 
Available from https:/ /www.the-star.co.ke/news/2019-05-01-court-stops-mucheru-from-appointing-new-cak-board/ 
148 Media Council of Kenya Act, s.6
149 Media Council of Kenya Act, s.7
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
70Theme C  Open Markets
Category O – Openness
4questioned given some of the decisions it has taken for example with guidelines developed for 
election coverage150 that were viewed to favour the ruling administration.151
The ICT industry is also regulated by other sector specific regulators. The Central Bank of Kenya 
for example, regulates both mobile and online payment systems under the National Payment 
Systems Act.152
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence concerning regulatory performance, including perceptions 
of the quality of regulation by communications businesses, consumer associations 
and other organizations
The Kenya Information and Communications Act envisages consumer protection. The 2010 
Consumer Protection Regulations under the Act require each licensed service provider to have 
consumer complaints mechanisms as well as customer service desks. Authorities are also 
empowered to handle consumer complaints. The Competition Authority keeps a public record 
of the cases it handles.153 It also receives complaints lodged to it by any person regarding any 
licensed broadcaster including those licensed to provide Internet broadband services.154 The 
Authority also carries out consumer education programmes known as Kikao Kikuu155 Swahili 
for high forum, where the Authority travels to different counties to engage with ICT consumers. 
The Authority has enforced consumer protection on several occasions. In 2018, telcos were 
fined over Kenya shillings 300 million (USD 3 million) for poor quality of service.156 The Authority 
announced that it had also acquired a system to monitor the quality of service.157 In 2017, 
the Authority issued guidelines on political messaging, to protect consumers from unsolicited 
150 Media Council of Kenya 2017 Guidelines for Election Coverage. Available from https:/ /www.mediacouncil.or.ke/en/mck/
images/AccreditationGuidelines/MCK-Election-Guidelines-2017 .pdf 
151 ELOG 2018 One Country, Two Elections, Many Voices. Available from https:/ /elog.or.ke › index.php › resource-centre › item 
› download
152 National Payment System Act, available from: https:/ /www.centralbank.go.ke/images/docs/legislation/NATIONAL%20
PAYMENT%20SYSTEM%20ACT%20(No%2039%20of%202011)%20(2).pdf 
153 Competition Authority of Kenya, determinations available from: https:/ /www.cak.go.ke/information-center/CAK-latest-
determinations 
154 Communications Authority of Kenya, Complaints  available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/consumers/ca-you/complaints  
155 Competition Authority of Kenya, Kikao Kikuu  available from https:/ /ca.go.ke/kikao-kikuu/  
156 Communications Authority 2018 Authority Fines Telcos Over Ksh. 300m for Poor Quality Services . Available from: https:/ /
ca.go.ke/authority-fines-telcos-over-ksh-300m-for-poor-quality-services/ 
157 CIO 2018 ‘CA unveils new framework for assessment of telecom quality of service’. Available at https:/ /www.cio.co.ke/
ca-unveils-new-framework-for-assessment-of-telecom-quality-of-service/ 
 https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Consumer-Protection-Regulations-2010-1.pdf
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
71 Theme C Open Markets 
Category O – Openness
4messages.158 The Guidelines were however criticized as being substantive legislation affecting 
entities that were not licensed by the Authority, and therefore not legally under their mandate.159 
The Kenya Information and Communications Act also establishes the Communication and 
Multimedia Appeals Tribunal, which can hear complaints against any publication or the conduct 
of a journalist or media enterprise; to hear appeals against the decisions of the industry regulators, 
the Communications Authority of Kenya and the Media Council of Kenya.160 
The Constitution of Kenya has entrenched public participation in the national values and principles 
of governance under its Article 10.161 Any person or group can approach any public office to 
petition on a matter that affects them.162 In addition, public policy decisions, including policy 
and law making process must seek and take into consideration the input of those who may be 
affected by the policy or law.163 
Although the understanding and the implementation of the public participation concept is still 
poor, the requirement provides an opportunity for industry associations, consumer organizations 
and civil society actors to engage with ICT policy makers. Some organizations that continue 
to engage ICT policy makers include the Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA),164 Consumers 
Federation of Kenya (COFEK),165 and KICTANet.166 
The courts have become an important avenue for the resolution of disputes pertaining to laws. The 
Bloggers Association of Kenya in 2018 filed a petition challenging among others criminalization 
of fake news through the Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act 2018.167 Prior to that, human 
rights defender Okiya Omtatah filed a petition objecting to the implementation of a Device 
Management System (DMS) that had been purchased by the Communications Authority. The 
158 Guidelines on Prevention of Dissemination of Undesirable Bulkand Premium Rate Political Messages and Political Social Media 
Content Via Electronic Communications Networks July 2017 . Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/
Guidelines-on-Prevention-of-Dissemination-of-Undesirable-Bulk-and-Premium-Rate-Political-Messages-and-Political-Social-Media-
Content-Via-Electronic-Networks-1.pdf 
159 iFreeKe 2017 Statement by BAKE on CA’s ‘Guidelines for Prevention of Dissemination of Undesirable Political Messages’. 
Available from: https:/ /www.ifree.co.ke/2017 /07 /statement-by-bake-on-cas-guidelines-for-prevention-of-dissemination-of-
undesirable-bulk-political-sms-and-social-media-content-via-electronic-communications-networks/ 
160 Judiciary Communications and Media Appeals Tribunal available from https:/ /www.judiciary.go.ke/communication-and-
multimedia-appeals-tribunal/#1535538098679-775d91e4-a0a6 
161 Constitution of Kenya, Art. 10
162 Constitution of Kenya, Art. 37
163 Constitution of Kenya, Art. 1 18
164 See for example:Ministry of ICT 2019 KEPSA to collaborate on Ajira http:/ /www.ict.go.ke/kepsa-working-collaboratively-
with-ict-ministry-on-ajira/ 
165 Onyango P, 2019 ‘Cofek opposes ICT ministry purchasing ICT for State departments’ The Standard 14 January . Available 
from: https:/ /www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2001309438/cofek-opposes-ict-ministry-purchasing-ict-for-state-departments 
166 KICTANet 2018  Talk to the senate: Priorities 2017-2022 . Available from: https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/?wpdmpro=talk-to-the-
senate-priorities-2017-2022 
167 Bloggers Association of Kenya (Bake) v Attorney General & 5 others [2018] eKLR
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
72Theme C Open Markets 
Category O – Openness
4Authority sought to install the DMS in mobile network operator premises ostensibly to whitelist 
all communication devices in the country.168 
OC.4 Is there sufficiently effective competition in communications 
access networks to protect consumer interests?
 ▶ Indicator: Number of fixed and mobile broadband providers
There are more than 10 fixed and mobile broadband providers in the country. As of June 2019, 
there were 52 million Internet subscriptions of which 99.9 percent were through mobile data. 
At the time, Safaricom PLC had 65.3% of the mobile Internet market share, followed by Airtel 
Networks Limited (26.9%), Telkom Kenya Limited 7.2% Finserve Africa Limited (0.4%) and 
Mobile PayLimited at 0.2%.
Fixed Internet data providers and their respective subscriber bases as at June 2019 were as 
follows: Wananchi Companies Ltd (34.8%); Safaricom PLC (32.7%); Jamii Telecommunications 
Ltd (14.6%); Poa Internet Kenya Ltd (7.8%); Internet Solutions Kenya Ltd (3.7%); Mawingu 
Networks Ltd (2.4%); Liquid Telecommunications Kenya Limited (2.1%); Telkom Kenya Ltd (1.2%); 
Mobile Telephone Networks Business Kenya Ltd (0.1%); Frontier Optical Networks Ltd (0.1%); 
and other fixed service providers (0.3%).169 The data shows that the top two service providers 
command over 60% of the market, indicating that consumers have limited choice. 
168 Okiya Omtatah Okoiti v Communication Authority of Kenya & 8 others [2018] eKLR
169 Communications Authority 2019, Sector Statistics Quarter 4 2018/19 available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2019/09/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q4-2018-19.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
73 Theme C Open Markets 
Category O – Openness
4THEME D  
Open Content
OD.4 Does the government encourage the use of open educational 
resources (OER) and facilitate open access to academic and 
scientific resources?
 ▶ Indicator: Educational policy framework concerning OER
Kenya is a signatory to UNESCO’s 2012 Paris Declaration on Open Education Resources 
licensed under Creative Commons open licenses.170 Several OER initiatives in the country exist. 
They include Teacher Education in Sub-Saharan Africa (TESSA), a network of educators who 
offer OER with the object of improving teacher education. Others are OER Africa and Africa 
Virtual University (AVU) headquartered in Nairobi. 
The 2015 National Education Sector Plan by the Ministry of Education acknowledges the lack 
of open educational resources for secondary level education.171 Among the challenges to OER 
adoption include lack of local content; incompatibility of available OER with the Kenyan syllabus; 
negative attitudes among teachers and school leaders; and resistance from the publishing 
industry.172 The Kenya Education Network (KENET) is among non-state institutions advocating 
for OER173 as Kenya ventures into digital learning.174 
Universities are increasingly creating repositories where research is shared.175 Private universities 
such as USIU-Africa176 and Strathmore,177 have arrangements for access to world class journals 
and other academic and scientific resources. Public institutions struggle to keep up with 
subscriptions. The University of Nairobi has made arrangements for access to a few academic 
170 The Declaration https:/ /en.unesco.org/oer/paris-declaration 
171 Ministry of Education 2015 National Education Sector Plan . Available at www.education.go.ke › downloads › category › 
17-policy-documents
172 Orwenjo D and Erastus F 2018 ‘Challenges of Adopting Open Educational Resources (OER) in Kenyan Secondary Schools: 
The Case of Open Resources for English Language Teaching (ORELT)’ Journal of Learning for Development Available at https:/ /
jl4d.org/index.php/ejl4d/article/view/282/316 
173 KEBT 2018 Why we should embrace Open Educational Resources (OER). Available from: https:/ /www.kenet.or.ke/content/
kenya-education-network-0 
174 ICTA Digital Learning Curriculum.  Available at http:/ /icta.go.ke/digischool/digital-content/ 
175 See for example, https:/ /www.uonbi.ac.ke/index.php?q=node/146 
176 USIU-Africa e-journals. Available at https:/ /www.usiu.ac.ke/806/e-journals/ 
177 Strathmore University Library Services . Available from https:/ /www.library.strathmore.edu/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
74Theme D  Open Content
Category O – Openness
4journals. Many public and private universities publish dissertations online, increasing local 
knowledge. However, access to knowledge outside universities is still a challenge.
OD.5 Does the government require ISPs to manage network traffic 
in a way that is transparent, impartial and neutral, without 
discriminating against particular types of content or content from 
particular sources?
 ▶ Indicator: Regulatory arrangements and practice concerning net neutrality and 
competition for online and network services
Kenya is yet to adopt net neutrality laws. Organizations such as KICTANet have debated 
the issue of net neutrality, with many supporting the idea of non-discrimination in online and 
network services. However, some state that it should be possible to subsidize and prioritize 
e-government services. This is based on the understanding that government services are 
increasingly being offered exclusively online yet not everyone has access to the Internet.178 
In 2018, the Communications Authority called for expression of interest in a study on OTT 
services.179 The study is yet to be completed, but advocacy groups have compiled views on 
the policy concerns with Over the Top Technologies (OTT) regulation.180 
The sector has several zero-rated services. Most mobile network credit bundles come with free 
WhatsApp, or free YouTube.181 Social networking sites are also supporting the development of 
“lite” versions of their apps, for example Facebook Lite and Facebook Kadogo that consume 
less data bundles.182 Free basics has been criticized for not being people-centric but rather 
centered on getting more people online for purposes of increasing the company’s market shares. 
For example, the free content is not fully relevant and it is not available in local languages.183 
Safaricom has the largest market share in the mobile data market and in broadband provision. 
Some argue that bundling of products, particularly the mobile money service MPesa, has given 
Safaricom an unfair advantage and created a barrier to entry into the market for other players. A 
178 KICTANet 2016, Ten Years of ICT Policy Making in Kenya. Available from https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/?page_id=401 15# 
179 Communications Authority 2018 Consultancy Services For The Study On Over-The-Top (OTTs) Technologies Services In Kenya. 
Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/document/consultancy-services-for-the-study-on-over-the-top-otts-technologies-services-in-kenya/ 
180 KICTANet 2019  Regulating OTTs Policy Brie f. Available from: https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/?page_id=401 15 
181 See for example: Airtel Kenya Free Basics . Available from https:/ /www.airtelkenya.com/Internet_org and Telkom Kenya Free 
Bundles  available at https:/ /telkom.co.ke/freedom-bundles-1 
182 Safaricom 2019, Terms and Conditions for Free Facebook available from: https:/ /www.safaricom.co.ke/free-facebook-terms-
and-conditions 
183 Wanjohi N. W 2017 Free Basics in Kenya. Available fromhttps:/ /advox.globalvoices.org/wp-content/uploads/2017 /07 /
KENYA.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
75 Theme D Open Content 
Category O – Openness
42018 competition study184 confirmed this dominance and recommended splitting of Safaricom’s 
services. The Competition Authority of Kenya warned against taking action, arguing that although 
Safaricom was dominant, it had not abused its market position.185 A March 2019 report by 
the National Assembly ICT Committee also made recommendations on the principles and 
guidelines on several issues affecting competition in the ICT sector including: spectrum allocation; 
market share; broadband services and rates; SMS termination rates; Unstructured Supplementary 
Service Data (USSD) access rates; mobile money service rates; access to telecommunications 
infrastructure; content services and national roaming.186
THEME E  
Open Data and Open Government
OE.1 Has legislation been enacted which requires open access to 
public data, with appropriate privacy protections, and is that 
legislation implemented?
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of a legal framework for access to open data which is 
consistent with international norms and privacy requirements
The right of access to information is entrenched in the Constitution under Article 35. This has 
been effected through the Access to Information Act, 2016 that is overseen by the office of the 
Ombudsman. The Act in section 5, provides for proactive disclosure of information that is of 
interest to the public. The Ombudsman issued guidelines requiring Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies (MDAs) to publish contacts of their information officers. An online Access to Information 
Centre (ATI) to provide information on implementation of the mandate.187 The newly enacted 
184 Analysys Mason 2018 Presentation to stakeholders and members of the public Telecommunication competition market study 
in Kenya. Available at: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Presentation-on-Telecommunication-Competition-
Study-to-Stakeholders-.pdf 
185 Miriri D 2018, ‘Kenya’s competition watchdog says no need for action on Safaricom’ Reuters  7 Aug. Available from: 
https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/kenya-telecoms/kenyas-competition-watchdog-says-no-need-for-action-on-safaricom-
idUSL5N1UY44D 
186 Report on the inquiry in the legislative and regulatory gaps affecting competition in the telecommunications sub-sector. Available 
from: http:/ /www.parliament.go.ke/sites/default/files/2019-03/ICT%20Report%20on%20Inquiry%20on%20Competition%20
in%20Telcom%20subsector.pdf 
187 Commission for Administrative Justice Access to Information Centre avaialble from  https:/ /www.ombudsman.go.ke/index.
php/access-to-information-centre 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
76Theme E  Open Data and Open Government
Category O – Openness
4Data Protection Act exempts research data, provided that it has been deidentified.188 This is 
envisaged to complement government open data initiatives. 
Kenya is a member of the Open Government Partnership (OGP), a multilateral partnership in 
support of open data.189 In 2011, the country launched an open data portal that has since 
been upgraded with tools for open research.190 Kenya’s 2018 - 2020 National Action Plan on 
Open Government aspires to enhance transparency in government contracting and leverage 
on ICTs to enhance information sharing.191 In June 2018, the President through an Executive 
Order directed his administration to adopt open contracting.192
To date, all Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) have developed websites that 
provide basic information such as their mandate, ongoing activities, open tenders and contact 
information. Many MDAs also have social media accounts through which they share information 
with the public.193 
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence concerning the extent to which open data resources are 
available and used online
In practice, government agencies are not well sensitized to implement the right of access to 
information, making it difficult for the public to enjoy this right.194 There have been several cases 
where courts have had to issue access to information orders to enforce the right. In 2017, in a 
case filed by opposition leader Raila Odinga,195 the Supreme Court issued an order granting 
him access to information on election results held by the Independent Electoral and Boundaries 
Commision (IEBC).196 Despite the order, the IEBC refused to provide all the information requested, 
leading to the annulment of the election. In 2018, lawyer Apollo Mboya sued the monopoly 
electricity provider, Kenya Power seeking among others, information on inflated power bills.197 
188 Data Protection Act, s.53
189 Open Government Partnership, Members https:/ /www.opengovpartnership.org/members/kenya/ 
190 ICT Authority of Kenya Open Data Portal . Available at http:/ /icta.go.ke/public-data-now-easier-to-find-as-open-data-unveils-
a-user-friendly-website/ 
191 Government of Kenya Open Government Partnership (OGP) National Action Plan III 2018 –2020 . Available from https:/ /
www.opengovpartnership.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/KENYA_Action-Plan_2018-2020_0.pdf 
192 Executive Order No. 2 of 2018, available from https:/ /openinstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07 /Executive-Order-
No.-2-of-2018-Procurement.pdf 
193 See for example https:/ /twitter.com/fredmatiangi/ 
194 Maureen K 2019, ‘Access to public information an uphill struggle in Kenya despite law’ Business Daily  27 February. Available 
from: https:/ /www.businessdailyafrica.com/datahub/Access-to-public-information-an-uphill-struggle-in-Kenya/3815418-
5002502-osnfrgz/index.html 
195 Raila Odinga and another versus Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission and others (2019) eKLR available from 
http:/ /kenyalaw.org/caselaw/cases/view/140420/ 
196 Raila Odinga and another versus Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission and others (2019) eKLR available from 
http:/ /kenyalaw.org/caselaw/cases/view/140420/ 
197 Maina C 2018, ‘Apollo Mboya sues KPLC, ERC over new ‘discriminatory’ charges’ The Star  2 August. Available from: https:/ /
www.the-star.co.ke/news/2018-08-02-apollo-mboya-sues-kplc-erc-over-new-discriminatory-charges/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
77 Theme E Open Data and Open Government 
Category O – Openness
4Likewise, in an ongoing case regarding Kenya’s digital ID system, known as Huduma Namba, 
petitioners have complained to the court that they could not access information regarding the 
technology used in the project.198
A positive development was noted when the County Government of Makueni unveiled a portal 
containing information on all ongoing projects.199 The County Government has also been lauded 
by civil society organizations for inclusive policy making, where county government officials 
engage residents in assessing their needs and priorities for government planning.200
One of the most utilized pieces of information online is the laws of Kenya maintained by the 
National Council for Law Reporting.201 The kenyalaw.org portal contains information on laws, 
bills, case law, gazette notices as well as court cause lists. Another useful website is that of the 
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics which contains statistical information, including census data 
among other statistical reports of surveys conducted by the institution.202 In addition, the African 
Open Data Centre has several visualizations built on census data.203 It also includes data for 
open access, for example data on air quality in Machakos County.204 
The IEBC publishes information on the voter register, election results and other election information 
online.205 All this information is used by political parties and members of the public. However, 
in the 2017 election, some of the electoral information was misused to profile voters and send 
them targeted messages.206 
Parliament also publishes information on its proceedings, status of Bills, committee reports as 
well as decisions.207 Parliamentary proceedings are also broadcast live and streamed online 
by the state broadcaster, Kenya Broadcasting Communication (KBC). Citizen groups such as 
Mzalendo208 analyze parliamentary data and rank Members of Parliament on their performance. 
198 Chumba, B 2019, ‘PS Kibicho Defends Huduma Namba in Court’, KBC , 2 October. Available from: https:/ /www.kbc.co.ke/
ps-kibicho-defends-huduma-namba-in-court/ [2 October 2019].
199 County Government of Makueni Projects available from https:/ /www.makueni.go.ke/projects/
200 Kariuki J 2018 ‘Makueni goes online to lift tendering veil’ Business Daily 8 July. Available from: https:/ /www.businessdailyafrica.
com/news/counties/Makueni-goes-online-to-lift-tendering-veil/4003142-4652620-y1o2qw/index.html 
201 Kenya Law. Available from: http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/ 
202 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. https:/ /www.knbs.or.ke/ 
203 Hurumap Making Census Data Easy to Use . Available from: https:/ /kenya.hurumap.org/
204 Code for Africa Air Quality Datasets. Available from: https:/ /africaopendata.org/dataset 
205 Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission 2018 Election Results. Available from: https:/ /www.iebc.or.ke/
election/?election-results 
206 Mutung’u G 2018, The Influence Industry Data and Digital Election Campaigning in Keny a available from: https:/ /cdn.ttc.io/s/
ourdataourselves.tacticaltech.org/ttc-influence-industry-kenya.pdf 
207 Parliament of Kenya. Available from: http:/ /parliament.go.ke/ 
208 Mzalendo About. Available from: http:/ /info.mzalendo.com/info/mzalendo-overview 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
78Theme E Open Data and Open Government 
Category O – Openness
4Mzalendo209 and Jadili210 are platforms for citizen interaction with Bills, Policies and parliamentary 
deliberations. 
The Communications Authority publishes quarterly statistics reports on the status of the ICT sector. 
The report includes the services available and the number of persons accessing them. The statistics 
are compiled from returns filed by licensees of the authority. The statistics are used in government 
planning, and by other relevant stakeholders working in the sector. In 2019, the report indicated 
that the country had exceeded 100% mobile penetration.211 This led to questions regarding the 
methods used to calculate the penetration rate as the statistics appeared not to take into account 
persons with multiple subscriptions of SIM cards.212 
The Kenya Open Data Portal contains government datasets. It had been viewed 44 million times 
by 2015 and over 2.6 million people had interacted with the data.213 
OE.2 Do government departments and local government agencies have 
websites which are available in all official languages and through 
all major browsers?
 ▶ Indicator: Government policy to ensure provision of websites with appropriate 
language and browser access, and evidence concerning effective implementation
The Government Enterprise Architecture Standards provide guidelines for the standardization of 
government systems. The policy, which is in its first edition, does not succinctly offer directions on 
the use of local languages. This is partly because the document majorly addresses government 
systems where government officials are the users. Consequently, although the Constitution 
provides for three national languages i.e. English, Swahili and Kenyan Sign Language; most 
of the websites are in English.
 ▶ Indicator: Proportion of government services with websites (value/ranking in 
UNDESA online services index)
The United Nations e-government survey 2018 ranked Kenya as fairly developed in the 
E-Government Development Index. Kenya is in the middle E-Government Development Index 
209 Mzalendo Dokeza- Give your views on Bills. Available at https:/ /dokeza.mzalendo.com/ 
210 Jadili Add your voice. Available at http:/ /jadili.ictpolicy.org/ 
211 Communications Authority 2019, Sector Statistics Quarter 4 2018/19 available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2018/12/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q1-2018-2019.pdf 
212 Sunday F 2018, ‘Kenya’s Internet usage figures raise authenticity questions’ The Standard  23 October. Available from: https:/ /
www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2001300026/kenya-s-Internet-usage-figures-raise-authenticity-questions 
213 CIO 2015 ‘Kenya Open Data portal hits 44 million page views’. Available at 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
79 Theme E Open Data and Open Government 
Category O – Openness
4(EGDI) 2018 (Between 0.25 to 0.50).214 With regard to the level of online service index, Kenya 
is ranked as high OSI in relation to the corresponding EGDI level. E-participation is defined as 
the process of engaging citizens through ICTs. Kenya is ranked as high EPI (between 0.50 and 
0.75). In the e-government development index, Kenya is ranked as 122. On the demand side, 
many residents while grateful for decentralization of government services express disquiet at the 
high cost of accessing these services. This is because many users are not digitally literate and 
therefore have to depend on the services of intermediaries to access e-government services. A 
typical service such as the filing of tax returns, costs Ksh. 400 (USD 4) at a cyber cafe in Nairobi.
Challenges
There are several challenges that hamper openness in Kenyan ICT space. They include: 
1. The lack of non-commercial perspectives in conceptualizing provision of ICTs. Hence the 
licensing frameworks are largely focused on facilitating commercial players. 
2. The disruptive nature of the Internet has resulted in cross and co-regulation of ICT players. 
This sometimes results in competition among regulators to the detriment of the players. 
3. There is a vacuum on how to approach new technologies e.g. cryptocurrencies. This 
sometimes slows down innovation, particularly where a regulator approaches new 
technology from an old regulatory model. 
4. Kenya has not adopted open standards; hence many government MDAs procure technology 
that may not be open. There is danger of vendor lock in. In addition, closed standards may 
deny local technologists transfer of knowledge. 
5. PWDs face numerous challenges in accessing technology. There is a need for more 
awareness and policies for accessibility of government services online. 
6. The domination of the Kenyan Internet market by one company, Safaricom, raises challenges 
in balancing between regulation of competition while encouraging growth of the industry. 
7. The lack of utilization and optimization of the universal service fund creates doubts as to the 
efficacy of universal service funds in enhancing access to the Internet.
8. The lack of awareness and fear about open educational resources may result in OER not 
being promoted in ongoing education reforms. 
9. Regulatory discretion in areas such as spectrum allocation makes the process uncertain. 
214 United Nations 2018 e-government survey. Available from: https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/Portals/egovkb/
Documents/un/2018-Survey/E-Government%20Survey%202018_FINAL%20for%20web.pdf  
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
80Theme E Open Data and Open Government 
Category O – Openness
410. The low representation of stakeholder groups such as civil society and academia in policy 
making means that the country misses out on varied perspectives. It may also explain the 
high number of court cases challenging ICT policy decisions.
11. Lack of awareness and an information sharing culture among MDAs dilutes the enjoyment 
of the right of access to information.
12. Lack of access to the Internet coupled with low levels of digital literacy hampers e-government 
as people incur more expenses to use intermediaries to access these services. 
13. Due to lack of net neutrality rules in Kenya there is a possibility of international technology 
multinationals defining what net neutrality should look like at the expense of local players 
in the technology industry.
14. There is a need for enforcement of the open standards created and to have someone who 
can be held to account for lack of enforcement.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
81 Theme E Open Data and Open Government 
Category O – Openness
4Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
Policy Recommendations for Various 
Stakeholders
Government 
• Review the licensing framework to include non-commercial business models for provision of 
ICT services. These include community networks. 
• Adopt the multistakeholder model, where they consult all parties. For example, regulation 
of cryptocurrencies could benefit from research by academia, policy perspectives from civil 
society as well as experience in regulating ICTs from ICT regulators. 
• Encourage the use of free and open software in its ranks, as this promises more transfer of 
knowledge hence more holistic development. 
• Enforce directives on accessibility by ensuring that all broadcasters comply with requirements 
for making their content accessible to persons with disabilities. 
• Publish information on consumer complaints handled. 
• Regularly update and publish data for open access. This includes data on open contracting. 
• Adopt open data standards, for example publishing data in machine readable formats, 
especially for Government departments that publish data.
• Sensitize its officers on the importance of open data and access to information, so that the 
officers stop creating barriers to these resources. 
• Pilot other methods of access to e-government services, particularly for marginalized and 
underserved persons, to cushion them from additional barriers to accessing the services. 
For example, the government could partner with educational institutions for their facilities to 
serve as e-government centers and officers in those facilities to work part-time in the centers. 
• Develop a policy that guarantees its websites have content in local languages and formats 
that are widely understood. This includes local languages as well as videos, for example 
with instructions on application for passports.
• Train officials on the process of digitizing information and the importance of this in terms of 
access to information by the citizens.
• Facilitate discussion on Kenyan perspectives on network neutrality, to assess how the issue 
applies locally. Unique Kenyan challenges such as lack of uniform Internet access and the 
frameworks that support neutrality.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
82
Category O – Openness
4Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
• Address the lack of proper protection for, and the inadequate measures to punish intellectual 
property infringement. 
Private sector
• Collaborate more with universities in research. Public universities which are poorly funded 
but well-resourced with academics are a ready resource on many issues including increasing 
access to the Internet and advancing local content. 
• Invest more in research and development. 
• Innovate and develop software and applications using open source software. 
• Participate in policy making processes to promote the use of open standards. 
Academia
• Carry out research for informed decision-making on the issue of net neutrality. There is also 
need for research on the effects of zero-rated services offered by mobile network companies. 
• Make use of available open data to share insights on the society. They should also give 
feedback to the open data producers on the challenges they face while using the data. 
• Curate government content and make it available for use by the public. 
Civil Society 
• Rank government websites and portals for ease of use. 
• Improve the accessibility of their websites. For example, website content should as far as 
practicable be in machine readable format to accommodate those with visual and other 
disabilities. Consumer engagement mechanisms on websites should also be designed to 
be inclusive to the digitally illiterate and semi-literate as well as persons with disabilities. 
• Share more policy perspectives on the role of free and open software in the development 
of the Internet in Kenya. 
• Create awareness on consumer digital rights. 
• Analyze the nature of complaints so as to advocate for more long-term solutions for the most 
pressing problems. For example, consumer complaints on unsolicited political messaging 
could be resolved through policy interventions such as requiring bulk SMS operators to be 
accountable for messages sent through their systems.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
83
Category O – Openness
484855
CATEGORY A  
ACCESSIBILITY 
TO ALLTHEME A  
Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
AA.1 Is statistical information concerning access and use of Internet 
regularly gathered by national statistical systems and/or other 
competent authorities, on a systematic basis?
 ▶ Indicator: Arrangements for gathering aggregate and disaggregated statistical 
information, from diverse sources, including the inclusion of relevant questions in 
household surveys
Statistical information concerning access and use of the Internet is regularly gathered by the 
Communications Authority (CA). The license agreement granted by the CA obliges Internet Services 
Providers (ISPs) to provide Internet usage data on a quarterly basis. The 2019 Communications 
Authority of Kenya Sector Statistics for January to March 2019 puts the percentage of total Internet 
users at 97%.215 However, the statistics have been criticized as not being completely accurate or 
reliable because given the methodology adopted to calculate the results. For example, mobile 
Internet users are established by the number of SIM-cards registered instead of unique users, as 
one person can have multiple devices with multiple SIM cards. 
Additionally, the CA partners with the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) in conducting 
regular household surveys.216 In 2010, the CA and KNBS carried out a National ICT Survey,217 
which provided gender and regionally disaggregated data on ICT use. The KNBS also collects 
information concerning ICT access during the national census held every 10 years.
215 Communications Authority of Kenya, Industrial Research and Statistics, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2019/06/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q3-2018-19.pdf [20 September 2019].
216 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2018, KENYA - Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 2015-2016, KNBS, Available 
from:http:/ /statistics.knbs.or.ke/nada/index.php/catalog/88 [1 September 2019]
217 Communications Commission of Kenya, 2010, National ICT Survey Report, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/National-ICT-Survey.pdf [5 September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
86Theme A  Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
Category A – Accessibility to All
5AA.4 Does the government have a policy and programme to implement 
universal access to reliable, affordable broadband, and is this 
effectively implemented?
 ▶ Indicator:  Adoption of a universal access strategy and evidence of effective 
deployment of UA resources
There are no specific laws that expressly provide for entitlement to Internet access. However, 
there are some laws that promote access to information such as Article 35 of the Constitution218 
statutes such as the Access to Information Act, 2016. Likewise, freedom of the media is provided 
under Article 34 of the Constitution and the right of access to information is provided under 
article 35 of the Constitution.219
Kenya’s e-Government strategy was launched in 2004220 and it seeks to increase the efficiency 
of public service provision.221 Further, the ecitizen.go.ke  portal provides a one-stop platform 
through which services by different government ministries are offered to citizens. These include: 
filing tax returns, obtaining driver’s licenses, marriage certificates, business registration, land 
searches, visa and passport applications, and payment for the services. Essential services such 
as payment of taxes, application for a birth certificate, and drivers license can only be issued 
through the portal. This means that citizens require Internet access to obtain the services. 
Internet penetration rates have grown tremendously over the years influencing increased 
digitization of government services. For wider reach, government agencies communicate and 
publish important public information through social media and websites.
Kenya has put in place measures to promote universal access to communications and the 
Internet. The Kenya Communications (Amendment) Act, 2009 established a Universal Access 
Fund (USF). The fund is financed by mandatory contributions of 0.5% of the profit of licensed 
telecommunications companies. The USF has a Board established to provide a framework for 
the management and administration of the fund.222 The fund carries out four key programmes: 
mobile telephone network expansion that seeks to cover mobile networks gaps; community 
218 Kenya Law Reform Commission, 35. Access to information - Kenya Law Reform Commission (KLRC), Available from: http:/ /
www.klrc.go.ke/index.php/constitution-of-kenya/1 12-chapter-four-the-bill-of-rights/part-2-rights-and-fundamental-freedoms/201-
35-access-to-information [3 September 2019]
219 Kenya Law Reform Commission, 35. Access to information - Kenya Law Reform Commission (KLRC), Available from: http:/ /
www.klrc.go.ke/index.php/constitution-of-kenya/1 12-chapter-four-the-bill-of-rights/part-2-rights-and-fundamental-freedoms/201-
35-access-to-information [3 September 2019]
220 Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology, 2004, E-government Strategy Accessed from: http:/ /www.ict.go.ke/
wp-content/uploads/2019/05/KENYA-E-GOVERNMENT-STRATEGY-2004.pdf [25 August 2019]
221 Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology, 2004, E-government Strategy Accessed from: http:/ /www.ict.go.ke/
wp-content/uploads/2019/05/KENYA-E-GOVERNMENT-STRATEGY-2004.pdf [25 August 2019] 
222 Communications Authority of Kenya, Purpose of the Fund, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/
Universal-Service-Fund-Framework.pdf [5 October 2019] 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
87 Theme A Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5broadband networks that establish broadband connections at major community service locations; 
ICT content applications, where the fund will promote the development of relevant local content; 
and, ICT capacity building and awareness.
The spectrum regulation framework stipulates that all spectrum should be allocated through 
reasonable pricing in accordance with the importance and use in the economy. In practice, 
spectrum has been allocated through auctions and on a first come first serve basis and some have 
been allocated for community based projects such as radio programs.223 However, challenges 
noted are that in some cases, spectrum is allocated to players who do not make use of it and 
at the same time, there is no policy to address this.
Over the years, there has been limited communication to the public on the use of the fund. 
Recently, the CA has been proactive in communicating the impact of the USF through video 
productions of the impact of USF in the newly covered regions.224 The CA conducted an ICT 
Access Gaps study in 2016 where it identified communication gaps within the country.225 The 
fund was applied to implement projects designed to address the gaps identified by the study. 
Through discussions on the Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTAnet) mailing list, the CA gave 
some examples on how the USF was used to provide affordable broadband to the masses.226 
According to the report, 62 sub-locations within Kenya had benefited from the mobile voice 
infrastructure project executed through the fund.227 The CA had also connected over 600 
secondary schools out of an initial projection of 896 schools in their Education Broadband 
Connectivity Project.228 
The National Broadband Strategy 2018 - 2023 is aimed at transforming Kenya into a globally 
competitive knowledge-based society enabled by affordable, secure and fast broadband 
connectivity.229 Further, the government is also implementing a project to create 4 ICT hubs in 
each of the 290 constituencies, and equip them with computers and the Internet.230 Additionally, 
223 Info Dev, 2010, National Broadband; build it and they will come, Available from: https:/ /www.infodev.org/infodev-files/
resource/InfodevDocuments_1 108.pdf [18 November 2019]
224 KICTANet, August 19, 2019, [kictanet] Two videos on Network Coverage in Bungoma and Kitui Counties, and in Turkana 
and Marsabit, Available from: https:/ /lists.kictanet.or.ke/pipermail/kictanet/2019-August/035046.html [12 October 2019]
225 Communications Authority of Kenya, 2016, ICT Access Gap Study, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/industry/universal-access/
ict-access-gap-study/ [10 September 2019]
226 KICTANet, 24 April 2019, [kictanet] Online discussion on State of Broadband in Kenya, Available from: https:/ /lists.kictanet.
or.ke/pipermail/kictanet/2019-April/034423.html [10 September 2019]
227 KICTANet, 29 April 2019, [kictanet] Online discussion on State of Broadband in Kenya, Available from: https:/ /lists.kictanet.
or.ke/pipermail/kictanet/2019-April/034462.html [10 September 2019]
228 KICTANet, 10 September 2019, [kictanet] Two videos on Network Coverage in Bungoma and Kitui Counties, and in Turkana 
and Marsabit, Available from: https:/ /lists.kictanet.or.ke/pipermail/kictanet/2019-September/035087 .html [10 September 
2019]
229 Republic of Kenya, 2019, National Broadband Strategy 2018-2023, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/Kenya-National-Broadband-Strategy-2018-2023.pdf [10 September 2019]
230 National Government CDF, 2019, THE CONSTITUENCY INNOVATION HUB PROJECT, Accessed from: https:/ /www.
ngcdf.go.ke/index.php/news/74-the-constituency-innovation-hub-project [13 September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
88Theme A Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5the country has 64 public libraries in 35 of the 47 counties.231 Public libraries managed by 
Kenya National Library Service provide free Internet, and computers for public access. Users can 
also bring their own devices to access the Internet. However, access to the library is subject to a 
small convenience fee of ksh 20 (about $0.2) per day.232 The government has also established 
Huduma Centres in every county, which serve as focal points for offering e-government services. 
The centres have computers which serve as cyber cafes at a small convenience fee.
THEME B  
Connectivity and Usage
AB.1 What proportion of the population uses the Internet, with what 
frequency, and is this proportion growing?
 ▶ Indicator: Proportion of households with Internet access
Access to and the use of the Internet has increased over the years due to continued investment 
in the sector by the government and the private sector. As of September 2019, the total 
Internet subscriptions stood at 52 million, out of which 48.4 percent (25.2 million) were on 
broadband.233 As of 2016, the International Telecommunication Union reported that 30% of 
households in the country had Internet access.234 
The growing numbers of social media users is an indicator of improved connectivity and usage. 
WhatsApp is the most widely used social media platform with 12 million users.235 Possible 
reasons could be that the cost of instant messaging is low compared to Short Message Services 
(SMS) that are charged per message, and that it allows for better group coordination. An 
interesting development is the growth of podcasting and vlogging by numbers and diversity of 
231 Kenya National Library Service, 2017 , Contact Us, Available from: https:/ /www.knls.ac.ke/index.php/contact-us [14 
September 2019]
232 Kenya National Library Service, 2017 , Fees & Pricing Available from: https:/ /www.knls.ac.ke/index.php/shapebootstrap 
[14 September 2019]
233 Communication Authority of Kenya, September 2019, Sector Statistics Report, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2019/12/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q1-2019-2020.pdf
234 International Telecommunication Union, June 2019, Core indicators on access to and use of ICT by households and individuals, 
International Telecommunication Union, Available from: https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2019/
CoreHouseholdIndicators_Jun2019.xlsx [3 September 2019]
235 Airtel Now Offers More Data, Free WhatsApp On Its Amazing Data Bundles https:/ /airtel.africa/media/more-data-free-
whatsapp 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
89 Theme B  Connectivity and Usage
Category A – Accessibility to All
5content. Video content creation has become popular both as main careers and as a hobby.236 
Table 2 below shows the number of social media platform users in the country.
Table 2. Number of Social media users in Kenya in 2017
Platform Number of Users per Month
Whatsapp 12 Million
Facebook 7.1 Million
Youtube 8 Million
Instagram 4 million
Linkedin 1 Million
Twitter 1 Million
Snapchat 0.25 Million
Source: Nendo Social Media Report 2017237 
According to a Hootsuite research,238 the active social media users were 8.2 million with a 
population penetration rate of 16%. Of that, the mobile social media users were 7.7 million 
representing 15% penetration rate. The After Access report put the social media users in Kenya 
at 25% from a 2017 research.239
AB.3 What proportion of the population subscribes to 
communications/broadband services, and is this growing?
 ▶ Indicator: Percentage of individuals who own a mobile phone, aggregate and 
disaggregated
According to the 2019 CA report, the total fixed broadband users are 402,103, which is 
approximately 0.84% of the population. In 2016, Kenya had a maximum capacity of 848 
Gbps and utilized 467 Gbps. By 2019 capacity increased by 458% and usage similarly 
increased by 101% to 977 Gbps.
236 Bloggers Association of Kenya, 2017 , State of the Internet in Kenya Report: https:/ /www.ifree.co.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/State-of-the-Internet-in-Kenya-report-2017 .pdf, [17 November 2019]
237 Nendo Social Media Report, 2017 , How Kenyans Use their Data: https:/ /www.nendo.co.ke/data [17 November 2019]
238 Hootsuite and We Are Social, 2019, Digital 2019 Kenya (January 2019) v01, Available from: https:/ /www.slideshare.net/
DataReportal/digital-2019-kenya-january-2019-v01 [13 September 2019]
239 After Access, 2017 , Let the people speak: using evidence from the Global South to reshape our digital future, Available From: 
https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/uploads/AfterAccess_IGF2017v2_1.pdf [17 October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
90Theme B Connectivity and Usage 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5 ▶ Indicator: Number of fixed broadband subscriptions per hundred population, 
aggregate and disaggregated
Kenya’s fixed-broadband market is dominated by four telecom operators, taking 84% of market 
share in 2018; Wananchi Group 37%, Safaricom 18%, Mawingu 15% and Jamii telecoms 
12%. Wananchi Group Holdings owns Zuku, which was the first provider to push for Fiber to 
home connectivity in Nairobi in 2012. Today, Safaricom, Jamii telecom and other small and 
medium enterprises offer fiber to home connectivity, and are spreading to other major cities in the 
country. In effect, Kenya’s fixed-broadband market grew by 82.3% year-over-year in 2017.240
Table 3. Broadband Subscriptions by Speed 2014-2018 
Fixed broadband speed 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
≤ 256Kbps 2,272 2,500 862 854 570
>256Kbps ≤ 512Kbps 10,572 3500 4,808 2,927 505
>512Kbps ≤ 1Mbps 62,146 18,000 22,702 14,459 8,905
>1Mbps ≤ 2Mbps 3,810 4,000 33,574 96,391 87,772
>2Mbps 9,567 69,000 91,046 173,672 273,746
Source KNBS241
 ▶ Indicator: Number of unique active mobile broadband subscribers per hundred 
population, by bandwidth, aggregate and disaggregated
According to the GSMA, the percentage of population covered by mobile broadband signal is 
78.6%. This is disaggregated as follows: 95.3% on 2G, 88.0% on 3G, and 61.0% on 4G. The 
number of 4G technology mobile transceivers grew from 3,873 in 2017 to 7,469 in 2018.242 
In 2018 mobile phone penetration was at 103% per 100 inhabitants.243 This was attributed 
to ubiquitous use of mobile money transfer services and consumer behavior; and, owning more 
than one SIM card to take advantage of the different voice, data and mobile transfer offers by 
different mobile service providers.
240 S&P Global, 2017 , Kenya Fixed Broadband, FTTH Fixed Wireless Improving Access Speeds, Retrieved from:https:/ /www.
spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/research/kenya-fixed-broadband-ftth-fixed-wireless-improving-access-
speeds [20 November 2019]
241 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2019, Economic Survey, Available from: https:/ /www.knbs.or.ke/download/economic-
survey-2019/ [19 November 2019]
242 GSMA, 2018, GSMA Mobile Connectivity Index, Available from: http:/ /www.mobileconnectivityindex.
com/#year=2018&zoneIsocode=KEN&analysisView=KEN [20 October 2019]
243 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2019, Economic Survey, Available from: https:/ /www.knbs.or.ke/download/economic-
survey-2019/ [19 November 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
91 Theme B Connectivity and Usage 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5According to the ITU, 68.2% of individuals were using a mobile phone in 2015.244 Recent 
research by the GSMA puts mobile phone ownership at 50.6%.245 The average mobile download 
speed in Kenya is at 16.87mbps, while the average upload speeds are at 6.88 mbps.
Table 4. The average speeds offered by the major mobile service providers 
in Kenya
Carrier Name Download Trimean Upload Trimean
Safaricom 20.97 9.29
Orange 15.93 7.83
Airtel 9.29 2.55
Source: Ookla report 2017246
There is no data on domestic Internet bandwidth per Internet user disaggregated by district. As 
of 2016, the International Internet bandwidth per user was 25.2kbps.247 Kenya experienced 
a year-on-year average growth rate of 141.08% for the time period 2012 to 2016. Among 
the selected countries, Kenya had the highest year-on-year average growth rate at 141.08%. 
Data from Packet Clearing House showed that peak data of 9.4G was transferred through the 
Nairobi Kenya Internet Exchange Point in 2019, with the average data transfer being 5.3G.248
A report by After Access, with a nationally representative survey sample size of 1,208 of ICT 
access and use by households and individuals put mobile ownership at 87% of the population. 
Of those who own mobile phones, 59% owned a basic phone, 28% a smartphone, and 14% 
a feature phone.249
According to the ITU,250 mobile cellular telephone subscriptions as of 2018 stood at 49,501,430. 
From further analysis, it seems ITU took the total number of SIM card subscriptions. Mobile phone 
subscriptions per 100 users was 73.84 as of year 2016.251 Kenya experienced a year-on-year 
244 ITU, Mobile Cellular Statistics 2000-2008: https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2019/
CoreHouseholdIndicators_Jun2019.xlsx [25 October 2019]
245 GSMA, 2018, GSMA Mobile Connectivity Index, Available from: http:/ /www.mobileconnectivityindex.
com/#year=2018&zoneIsocode=KEN&analysisView=KEN [20 October 2019]
246 Ookla, 2017 , Speed Test Awards Report, Available from: https:/ /www.speedtest.net/awards/reports/2017 /2017_Kenya_
Safaricom_Mobile.pdf [25 October 2019]
247 The World Bank, 2016, Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user, Available from: https:/ /tcdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/
entrp.inet.bandwidth?country=KEN&indicator=3405&viz=line_chart&years=2012,2016 20 October 2019]
248 Packet Clearing House, 2019, Internet Exchange Directory, https:/ /www.pch.net/ixp/dir [1 October 2019]
249 After Access, The Inside Internet Story of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, Available from: https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/
uploads/After-Access-Website-layout-r1.pdf [22 October 2019]
250 ITU, Mobile Cellular Statistics 2000-2008, Available from: :https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/
statistics/2019/CoreHouseholdIndicators_Jun2019.xlsx [25 October 2019]
251 The World Bank, 2016, Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop., Available from: https:/ /tcdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/
entrp.mob.sub?country=KEN&indicator=3423&viz=line_chart&years=2012,2016 [25 October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
92Theme B Connectivity and Usage 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5average growth rate of 4.67% for the time period 2012 to 2016. Among the selected countries, 
Kenya had the lowest year-on-year average growth rate at 4.67%.
According to ITU, the number of fixed broadband subscriptions per hundred population was 
0.72 as of 2018.252 Kenya experienced a year-on-year average growth rate of 108.52% for 
the time period 2005 to 2018.253 
During the fourth quarter of the 2018/19 financial year, the number of broadband subscriptions 
stood at 22.2 million.254 Fixed broadband subscriptions were 422,345. There is no data on 
unique mobile broadband subscribers; but using the available Communications Authority of 
Kenya data, the number of unique mobile broadband users can be calculated using the formula: 
Total broadband subscribers subtract Fixed broadband. This gives the total number of unique 
mobile broadband users at 21,777,655.
Table 5. Number of unique broadband subscribers in Kenya 2014 - 2018
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Mobile phone subscribers per 
100 inhabitants78.30 85.41 85.93 91.89 103.45
Wireless Internet subscribers 
per 100 inhabitants38.10 53.90 58.50 71.20 94.90
Internet Subscribers per 100 
Inhabitants38.30 54.19 58.82 71.61 95.52
Bits per second per capita 12,157.90 20,292.80 19,890.40 20,630.20 2 
5,033.17
Broadband subscription per 
100 inhabitants (wireless)9.68 16.20 27.70 36.50 45.20
Broadband subscription per 
100 inhabitants (Fixed)9.88 16.40 28.00 37.12 45.92
Source: KNBS 2019
252 ITU, Fixed Broadband 2000 Jun - 2019 Jun Statistics, Available from: ttps:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/
statistics/2019/Fixed_broadband_2000-2018_Jun2019_revised27082019.xls
253 The World Bank, 2018, Fixed broadband subscriptions (per 100 people), Available from: https:/ /tcdata360.worldbank.
org/indicators/h588c14bc?country=KEN&indicator=1742&viz=line_chart&years=1998,2018 [25 October 2019]
254 Communication Authority of Kenya, June 2019, Sector Statistics Report Q4 2018-19, pg19, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.
ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q4-2018-19.pdf. [31 September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
93 Theme B Connectivity and Usage 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5 ▶ Indicator: Number of IP addresses within the country, per hundred population
Kenya has a total of 5,688,554 IP addresses assigned.255 The total population from 2019 
census is 47,564,296,256 giving the number of IP addresses per 100 as 11.96 IP addresses 
(12%).
AB.4 What barriers to access are identified by users and non-users of 
the Internet?
 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions (by users and non-users) of barriers to their Internet access 
and use, aggregate and disaggregated, from household surveys and/or other sources
There is no aggregate data on access barriers identified by users. However, the perception 
barriers for non-users identified were: illiteracy, lack of content in local languages, lack of digital 
skills, and physical accessibility challenges. Perception barriers identified for users were; data 
affordability, device affordability, content concerns, privacy and security, gender issues, and 
electricity.257
The government has developed surveys and consultation arrangements that seek to address 
these variations of access and use in the different regions and among groups. The CA regularly 
holds public consultative meetings across the country named Kikao Kikuu,258 which is Swahili 
for “great gatherings”. During the last census in 2019, the public was asked whether they used 
the Internet, had a modem, and whether they have ever shopped online.
Also, there are several surveys that have been carried out on perceptions of the Internet. One 
survey by After Access259 interviewed 1,208 respondents from across Kenya. On barriers to 
Internet usage, 27 respondents indicated that they did not know what the Internet was, 21 
said they did not have a device to access the Internet, 12 said they did not know how to use 
the Internet, 4 said the Internet was too expensive, and 36 said they had other reasons on 
the barriers to Internet use. On barriers to mobile ownership, 58 said they could not afford a 
mobile phone, 23 said they did not have mobile coverage where they live, 44 said they did 
255 IP2Location, 2019, Kenya IP Address Ranges, Available from: https:/ /lite.ip2location.com/kenya-ip-address-ranges [25 
October 2019]
256 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 4 November 2019, 2019 Kenya Population and Housing Census Results, Available 
from:https:/ /www.knbs.or.ke/?p=5621 [6 November 2019]
257 Research ICT Africa, 2017 , Internet use, Barriers and Strategies: Perceptions from Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda and South Africa, 
Available from: https:/ /www.researchictafrica.net/docs/RIA%202016%20Comparative%20FGD%20study_Final_Web%20
version.pdf [25 September 2019]
258 Communications Authority of Kenya, 8 January 2018, Kikao Kikuu, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/kikao-kikuu/ [28 October 
2019]
259 After Access, The Inside Internet Story of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, Available from: https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/
uploads/After-Access-Website-layout-r1.pdf [22 October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
94Theme B Connectivity and Usage 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5not have electricity at home to charge the mobile phone, and 18 said they did not know how 
to use mobile phones.
Some of the respondents interviewed noted that fixed and mobile broadband services are 
largely concentrated in cities and large towns. They also explained that they were unable to 
access the same quality of service when they travelled outside urban areas. This is corroborated 
by the 2017 Access Gaps Study commissioned by the Communications Authority.260 The study 
found that some 164 administrative areas had no access to 2G networks at all, while in a 
further 418 areas, only less than 50% of the population had access to the networks. The study 
also established that 3G network coverage was completely unavailable in 1244 out of 7,149 
administrative sub-locations. Also, that in some 977 locations, 3G was available to less than 
50% of the population.
The blogging industry has grown significantly both in terms of numbers and in terms of diversity 
of content. There are affordable and free online services for individuals to express their views. 
Most individuals and civil society organizations express their views on free platforms such as 
wordpress.com, Facebook, Medium, Blogspot, Youtube, Twitter, and Instagram. There are 83 
registered domain registrars who also offer website hosting, and domain name registration.261 
Domain and hosting prices (combined cost about 40 USD) are not affordable to the low income 
populations.
THEME C  
Affordability
AC.1 Are mobile handsets capable of Internet connectivity affordable 
to all sections of the population?
 ▶ Indicator: Cost of a) entry-level mobile handset and b) smartphone as a 
percentage of monthly GNI p.c.
Access to the Internet is expanding, and is largely driven by mobile broadband. As of September 
2019, Kenya has a mobile penetration of 112%, and following the same trend, Internet 
260 Communications Authority 2017 , Access Gaps Study Report available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/
ICT_Access_Gap_Study.pdf 
261 KENIC, 2018, Licensed Registrars, Available from: https:/ /www.kenic.or.ke/index.php/en/licensed-registrars/licensed-
registrars/page-6 [26 September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
95 Theme C  Affordability
Category A – Accessibility to All
5penetration rate is also considerably high at 52 million subscriptions.262 A major driving factor 
for this trend is the availability of more affordable feature phones that are Internet enabled. The 
cost of the cheapest Internet enabled feature phone or smartphone as a proportion of monthly 
GDP per capita is 33.263
Entry-level fixed broadband as of September 2019 was KES 2,900 (USD 29) for a 5 Mbps 
link from Safaricom,264 KES 2,499 (USD 24.9) for 5 Mbps link from Zuku,265 and KES 1,500 
(USD 15) for a 2 Mbps link from Poa Internet.266 In a survey conducted by After Access, 4.6% 
of males and 3.4% of females expressed that Internet access was expensive.267 And speed of 
entry level broadband, according to the ITU, is at 30 Mbit/s.268
AC.2 Is broadband access and use affordable to all sections of the 
population?
 ▶ Indicator: Cost of entry-level fixed broadband connection and use as a percentage 
of monthly GNI p.c
The monthly cost of a 100 MB prepaid mobile broadband data plan (expressed as a proportion 
of monthly GDP per capita) is 47.8. The monthly cost of a 500 MB mobile broadband data 
plan (expressed as a proportion of month GDP per capita) is 47.5, and monthly cost of a 1 GB 
mobile broadband data plan (expressed as a proportion of monthly GDP per capita) is 47.9.
Mobile broadband connection as a percentage of Monthly GNI per capita through analysis 
of various service providers is shown on the table below. Safaricom269 offered monthly Internet 
bundles of 2 GB at USD 5, 5 GB at USD 10, and 25 GB data at USD 30. Airtel270 offered 1.5 
GB at USD 3, 4 GB at USD 5, and 10 GB at USD 10. Faiba 4G from Jamii Telecommunications 
Limited271 did not have comparable monthly plans, but it had 25 GB data at USD 10, 40 GB 
data at USD 20, and 70 GB data at USD 30.
262 Sector Statistics Report https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q1-2019-2020.pdf
263 GSMA, 2018, GSMA Mobile Connectivity Index, Available from: http:/ /www.mobileconnectivityindex.com/#year=2018&zly 
oneIsocode=KEN&analysisView=KEN [20 October 2019]
264 Safaricom, October 2019, Safaricom Home Fibre, Available from: https:/ /www.safaricom.co.ke/home/home-fibre.php [25 
October 2019]
265 Zuku, October 2019, Home Internet, Available from: https:/ /zuku.co.ke/triple-play/ [25 October 2019]
266 Poa Internet, 2019, Available from: https:/ /poa.co.ke/ [25 October 2019]
267 After Access, Reports - After Access, Available from: https:/ /afteraccess.net/reports [3 October 2019]
268 https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/publications/misr2018/MISR-2018-Vol-1-E.pdf 
269 Safaricom PLC, 2019, Zidisha Plus Data Bundles, Available from: https:/ /www.safaricom.co.ke/business/sme/mobile-
solutions/zidisha-plus-data-bundles [20 September 2019]
270 Airtel Kenya, 2019, airtel: Prepaid | Postpaid | 4G, Available from: https:/ /www.airtelkenya.com/Internet-amazing-data-
bundle [20 September 2019]
271 Faiba 4G, 2019, Faiba Mobile Products, Available from: https:/ /faiba4g.co.ke/4g [21 September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
96Theme C Affordability 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5Table 6. A comparison of Safaricom, Airtel and Jamii Faiba 4G 
Safaricom 
Monthly 
dataMonthly 
GNI pcAirtel 
Monthly 
dataMonthly 
GNI pcFaiba 4G 
Monthly 
dataMonthly 
GNI pcTelkom 
Monthly 
dataMonthly 
GNI pc
2 GB at 
USD 53.2% 1.5 GB at 
USD 31.9% 25 GB at 
USD 106.5% 1 GB at 
USD2.51.6%
5 GB at 
USD 107.8% 4 GB at 
USD 53.2% 40GB at 
USD 2013% 4 GB at 
USD 53.2%
25 GB at 
USD 3019.5% 10 GB at 
USD 106.5% 70 GB at 
USD 3019.5% 10 GB at 
USD159.75%
Practical data as of September 2019 for three cellular networks. A comparison of Safaricom, Airtel, and Jamii 
Telecommunications Limited’s Faiba 4G.
According to the 2017 ITU data, 0.7GB accounts for 4% of the monthly GNI per capita. The 
World Bank indicated Kenya’s affordability index in 2016 as 4.31. The country experienced 
a year-on-year average growth rate of 6.72% for the time period 2012 to 2016.272
Kenya has a number of zero-rated services and initiatives from the government and private 
sector, which help in improving Internet affordability. Availability of zero-rated services have 
been pushed by the stiff competition in the mobile service industry and marketing trends. Airtel 
Kenya and Safaricom offer Free WhatsApp, free Facebook,273 and free Wikipedia that are 
non-exhaustible under bundle offers. 
Additionally, the Universal Service Fund (USF) framework has a Community Broadband Networks 
component whose purpose is to take zero-rated broadband connectivity into towns and villages 
where broadband is currently unavailable. It aims to establish broadband connections at major 
public institutions within designated locations such as: schools, health facilities, government 
offices, post offices, libraries, and other community service locations.274
Some service providers have also launched price packages that target special and low income 
groups. For example, Safaricom has age specific products such as the Safaricom blaze offered 
to the youth under 26 years with cheaper Internet bundles with zero-rated access to some Internet 
platforms like Whatsapp.275
272 The World Bank, 2016, 4th pillar: Affordability, Available from: https:/ /tcdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/entrp.
afford?country=KEN&indicator=3481&viz=line_chart&years=2012,2016 [20 October 2019]
273 Safaricom PLC, March 2019, Free Facebook Terms and Conditions, Available from: https:/ /www.safaricom.co.ke/free-
facebook-terms-and-conditions [21 September 2019]
274 Communications Authority of Kenya, Universal Service Fund Framework, Available from: https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/Universal-Service-Fund-Framework.pdf [5 October 2019] 
275 Safaricom PLC, 2019, bundles - BLAZE, Available from: https:/ /blaze.co.ke/bundles/ [15 September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
97 Theme C Affordability 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5THEME D  
Equitable Access
AD.1 Are there significant differences in broadband access and use 
between regions and between urban and rural areas?
 ▶ Indicator: Geographical coverage in urban and rural areas, by level of bandwidth
There are significant differences in broadband access and use between regions and between 
urban and rural areas. The After Access Survey276 found that the number of Internet users in rural 
areas was 17%, and those of urban areas at 55%. Also, more options for Internet connectivity 
are available in urban areas than in rural areas. In urban areas, there is fixed broadband, 3G 
and 4G bundled mobile broadband and satellite; while there are wide variations in quality of 
connectivity in the rural areas. Data from nPerf shows that most of the regions away from the 
centre of the country like in the Northern parts of the country don’t have access at all.277
Moreover, as shown in the chart above, infrastructure investment has followed the discriminatory 
policy both in the colonial and early years of post-independence. In 1896, the Kenya - Uganda 
Railway was built along the lower part of Kenya, connecting Mombasa, Nairobi, Busia and 
Kisumu, to transport agricultural products across these regions and outside the country.278 The 
country has continued to build other infrastructure along the railway line. Using the nPerf data, 
it is apparent that there is very low connectivity and Internet enabling infrastructure outside the 
main transport corridor. The northern and far east part of Kenya has much lower coverage.
The data available from different sources have not been disaggregated to give comparisons 
of connectivity between urban and rural areas and in different regions. However, the nPerf279 
graph shows the regions without any mobile network coverage, meaning that the communities 
that live in those regions do not have broadband access. This probably explains why smartphone 
penetration in rural areas stood at 17% compared to that of urban areas at 55%, and social 
media use at 49.5% in urban areas compared to 16% in rural areas.280
276 After Access, The Inside Internet Story of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, Available from: https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/
uploads/After-Access-Website-layout-r1.pdf [22 October 2019]
277 Nperf, Safaricom 3G / 4G / 5G coverage map, Kenya, Available from: https:/ /www.nperf.com/en/map/KE/-/2665.
Safaricom/signal/ [23 September 2019]
278 Kenya Railways Corporation, Kenya Railway History, Available from: http:/ /krc.co.ke/?page_id=216 [17 October 209]
279 Nperf, Safaricom 3G / 4G / 5G coverage map, Kenya, Available from: https:/ /www.nperf.com/en/map/KE/-/2665.
Safaricom/signal/ [23 September 2019]
280 After Access, 2017 , Let the people speak: using evidence from the Global South to reshape our digital future, Available From: 
https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/uploads/AfterAccess_IGF2017v2_1.pdf [17 October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
98Theme D  Equitable Access
Category A – Accessibility to All
5AD.5 Do adults in all age groups make use of the Internet to the same 
extent?
 ▶ Indicator: Proportion of adults in different age groups who are using the Internet, 
and frequency of use, including disaggregation by sex
The proportion of men who had undergone secondary education as of 2009 was 84% and that 
of women was 80%.281 According to the World Bank, the total Adult literacy rate was 77.97% 
in 2016.282 According to Hootsuite, the literacy rate of males aged over 15 years was 84%, 
while for females was 74%, with the overall literacy rate of those over 15 years being 79%.283 
The proportion of women in wage employment was 34% while that of men was 66%. In effect, 
there are significant differences in Internet access and use between men and women. Internet 
users among women was 21% while Internet usage among men was 31%. Gender parity on 
Internet usage was 10%.284
Significantly, mobile ownership among men in Kenya is at 92%, while ownership among women 
stands at 82%. Gender parity is at 10%.285 The After Access research showed that 24% of 
women mobile users had a smartphone, compared to 31% of men. Only 22% of women, and 
32% of men were Internet users. Also, the percentage of mobile ownership stood at 92% for 
men and 83% for women.286
In yet another research by GSMA, women’s level of mobile ownership was found to be lower 
than that of men. Based on a total population over 18 years, 82% of women had access to 
mobile phones compared to 86% of men.287 For many Internet users, mobile is their sole or 
primary means of accessing the Internet. From the GSMA report, 75% of women and 63% of men 
who used the Internet in the past three months at the time of the survey, did so only on a mobile.
The Table 7 below shows patterns of social media usage aggregated by gender. Wider 
disparities exist and men are more active in social media, reading news, following local politics, 
281 KNBS Women Men Kenya facts and Figures. https:/ /www.knbs.or.ke/download/women-men-kenya-facts-figures-2017 /
282 The World Bank, 2016, Adult Literacy Rate, %, % Adults, Available from: https:/ /tcdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/entrp.
lit?country=KEN&indicator=3421&viz=line_chart&years=2012,2016 [25 October 2019]
283 Hootsuite and We Are Social, 2019, Digital 2019 Kenya (January 2019) v01, Available from: https:/ /www.slideshare.net/
DataReportal/digital-2019-kenya-january-2019-v01 [13 September 2019]
284 After Access, Reports - After Access, Available from: https:/ /afteraccess.net/reports [3 October 2019]
285 Research ICT Africa, Understanding the Gender Gap in the Global South: https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/uploads/2018-
After-Access-Understanding-the-gender-gap-in-the-Global-South.pdf
286 After Access, The Inside Internet Story of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, Available from: https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/
uploads/After-Access-Website-layout-r1.pdf [22 October 2019]
287 GSMA, 2019, The Mobile Gender Gap: Africa, Available from: https:/ /www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07 /The-Mobile-Gender-Gap-in-Africa.pdf [25 October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
99 Theme D Equitable Access 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5and government projects and policies. Women are more active in making social connections, 
chatting and staying in contact with friends and family.
Table 7. Patterns of social media usage in Kenya aggregated by gender
Activity Male Female
Reading News 83% 75%
Chatting 96% 96%
Making calls 60% 65%
Playing games 46% 45%
Staying in contact with friends and family 92% 92%
Making professional and business contacts 52% 49%
To market products and services 32% 29%
Follow government projects and updates on policies 59% 50%
Make friends 94% 88%
Follow local politicians 62% 50%
Get and share opinions 82% 87%
Share videos, pictures and music 81% 87%
Share content 45% 37%
Look for educational content 74% 67%
Source. Research ICT Africa 2017288
This data shows that there is an increase of Internet usage by women through blogs and videos. 
In 2017, the Bloggers Association of Kenya reported an increase of women-owned blogs and 
vlogs submitted for nomination. For the first time, women were awarded the accolade of 8 
categories in the 2017 Annual Bloggers Awards.289
There are also significant differences in the perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use 
between men and women. The table 8 (below) shows the reasons given for not using the Internet.
Table 8. Barriers to Internet Access and Use in Kenya in 2017
Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use Male Female
Don’t know what the Internet is 15.9% 35.3%
Have no access to devices (computers and smartphones) 24.7% 18.9%
No Internet, Not useful 29.4% 23.5%
Do not know how to use it 13.6% 10.2%
288 Research ICT Africa, 2017 , Internet use, Barriers and Strategies: Perceptions from Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda and South Africa, 
Available from: https:/ /www.researchictafrica.net/docs/RIA%202016%20Comparative%20FGD%20study_Final_Web%20
version.pdf [25 September 2019]
289 Bloggers Association of Kenya, 2017 , State of Internet in Kenya Report: https:/ /www.ifree.co.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/State-of-the-Internet-in-Kenya-report-2017 .pdf [17 November 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
100Theme D Equitable Access 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use Male Female
Not available in my area/ no mobile coverage 2.8% 1.9%
Too expensive 4.6% 3.4%
Source: Research ICT Africa 2017290
A 2015 GSMA survey found that there was lack of awareness and locally relevant content, 
lack of digital literacy and skills, and affordability among top barriers for non-Internet users. Of 
those interviewed, 46% said they don’t use the Internet because of lack of awareness and locally 
relevant content, 37% for lack of digital literacy and skills, 25% for affordability, 4% for lack of 
network coverage, 2% for security and trust barrier, and 22% for other reasons.291
However, there is no precise data on the proportion of adults in different age groups using the 
Internet, but Internet use by gender was at 31% for males, and 21% for females; while social 
media use by gender was 30% for males and 21% for females.292
THEME E  
Local Content and Language
AE.1 How many Internet domains and servers are there within the 
country?
 ▶ Indicator: Number of registered domains (including ccTLDs, gTLDs and 
IDNccTLDs) per thousand population, and trend where available
The Kenya Network Information Center (KeNIC) estimates that domain registrations for “.ke” 
domains were 93,446 as of September 2019.293 This number does not differentiate whether 
the domains are registered by Kenyans, or also by users from other countries. Data for gTLDs and 
290 Research ICT Africa, 2017 , Internet use, Barriers and Strategies: Perceptions from Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda and South Africa, 
Available from: https:/ /www.researchictafrica.net/docs/RIA%202016%20Comparative%20FGD%20study_Final_Web%20
version.pdf [25 September 2019]
291 GSMA, 2015, Connected Society Consumer barriers to mobile Internet adoption in Africa, Available from: https:/ /www.
gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=8170bf058e42cdb8c186c6c75fb2b30e&download [22 October 2019]
292 After Access, 2017 , Let the people speak: using evidence from the Global South to reshape our digital future, Available From: 
https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/uploads/AfterAccess_IGF2017v2_1.pdf [17 October 2019]
293 KENIC, .ke Domain Statistics, Available from: https:/ /www.kenic.or.ke/index.php/en/domain-statistics/ke-statistics [13 
October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
101 Theme E  Local Content and Language
Category A – Accessibility to All
5ccTLDs is not reliable. For example, Domain Name Stat puts all registered domains in Kenya at 
68,261294 with .com taking 60% of all domains at 40,652. However, this data is in complete 
contrast with .ke domains that stand at 93,446.
Table 9. Kenya Country domain registration trends, 2014 - 2018
Domain Users 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
ac.ke Institutions of Higher Education 792 580 726 786 891
.co.ke Companies 35,274 46,451 58,165 68,430 77,820
.go.ke Government entities 314 290 363 414 502
.info.ke Information/blogs 105 115 144 374 443
.me.ke Personal websites and email 650 260 236 386 345
.mobi.ke Mobile content 48 35 44 126 180
.ne.ke Network devices 65 140 175 466 277
.or.ke NGOs 1,190 1,485 1,860 1,981 1,976
.sc.ke Lower and middle institutions of 
learning95 665 833 1,027 1,212
.ke Second level domain - - - - 2,098
Total 38,533 50,111 62,638 73,072 85,744
The World Economic Forum’s Global Information Technology Report indicates that the number 
of secure web servers per million population is 7.80 as of 2016. Kenya experienced a year-
on-year average growth rate of 32.92% for the time period 2012 to 2016.295
AE.4 Is there a substantial and growing volume of Internet content 
in diverse local and indigenous languages, including locally-
generated content?
 ▶ Indicator: Proportion of population whose principal language and script are 
available on leading online services
For local content diversity, the country does not need to add new scripts for access. Kenyan 
languages use the Latin script296 which is supported by all domain and online services. Kenyan 
websites use the Latin script. Therefore, users can access content in their language using the 
294 Domain Name Stat, October 2019, Available from:https:/ /domainnamestat.com/statistics/country/KE [25 October 2019]
295 The World Bank, 2016, Secure Internet servers/million pop., Available from: https:/ /tcdata360.worldbank.org/indicators/
entrp.inet.secure?country=KEN&indicator=3407&viz=line_chart&years=2012,2016 [25 October 2019]
296 Worldstandards, The world’s scripts and alphabets:https:/ /www.worldstandards.eu/alphabets/ , retrieved on 13/1 1/2019
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
102Theme E Local Content and Language 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5Latin script. There is a small population of Arabic speakers, who can access the Arabic Script 
in registering domains from registries that support Arabic scripts.297 However, the Kenyan .ke 
registry only accepts Latin script registrations.
Kenya has 68 local languages298 with English and Kiswahili being the official languages.299 
Local languages are not so popular on the Internet considering that English, Swahili and Sheng 
(Swahili slang) dominate most conversations on online platforms. Community radios which target 
specific audiences and local communities speak in local languages, but most online platforms 
are in English, with a very few percentage in Kiswahili. 
Government websites are used by the government to relay information to the citizens remotely 
and offer public services. Language is an important aspect of service delivery. There is no study 
that shows preference of Kenyans in the usage of language in written communications. A recent 
research by Research ICT Africa300 shows that only 1.96 of the sampled population expressed 
that language was a barrier to Internet use. 
Although Kenya has English and Kiswahili as the official languages, major government websites 
such as the judiciary.go.ke, ecitizen.go.ke, klrc.go.ke, parliament.go.ke, and president.go.ke 
are all in English.
297 ICANN, 8 September 2015, Linguistic Diversity in the Internet Root: The Case of the Arabic Script and Jawi, Available from: 
https:/ /www.icann.org/news/blog/linguistic-diversity-in-the-Internet-root-the-case-of-the-arabic-script-and-jawi [13 October 
2019]
298 Wikipedia, 30 October 2019, African linguistic maps: Uganda and Kenya, Available from: http:/ /www.muturzikin.com/
cartesafrique/17 .htm [2 November 2019]
299 Kenya Law Reform Commission, Constitution of Kenya 7 . National, official and other languages, Available from: http:/ /
www.klrc.go.ke/index.php/constitution-of-kenya/108-chapter-two-the-republic/173-7-national-official-and-other-languages 
[23 October 2019]
300 After Access, 2017 , Let the people speak: using evidence from the Global South to reshape our digital future, Available From: 
https:/ /afteraccess.net/wp-content/uploads/AfterAccess_IGF2017v2_1.pdf [17 October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
103 Theme E Local Content and Language 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5THEME F  
Capabilities / Competencies
AF.1 Do school and higher educational curricula include training in ICTs 
and media and information literacy, focused on effective and safe 
use, and are these curricula implemented in practice?
 ▶ Indicator: Policy concerning school curricula, including media and information 
literacy, intercultural dialogue and training in ICT skills
Digital literacy is one of the seven competencies outlined in the Basic Education Curriculum 
Framework 2017.301 The policy broadly describes digital literacy as having the knowledge, 
skills and behaviours which are necessary to effectively and safely use a wide range of digital 
content and devices. The description also includes the ability to engage in online communications 
on different platforms, being aware of and adhering to ethical behaviour protocols, being 
aware of societal issues raised through digital media, and being able to search, evaluate and 
use digital information. Digital literacy is treated as a multidisciplinary course incorporated in 
geography, social science, languages and computer courses. It is also incorporated in most 
levels of learning; from middle level education to tertiary level of education.
Intercultural dialogues have played critical roles in promoting cultural diversity, social cohesion 
and tolerance in online platforms. The National Cohesion and Integration Commission’s (NCIC) 
policy recognizes the role of education in fostering peace and cohesion.302 The NCIC policy 
strategy therefore includes intercultural education in national and secondary education. It has 
also sought to promote cultural events and festivals targeting learning institutions. Education is 
needed to implement the constitution, which emphasized promotion of social cohesion and 
peace between communities. In 2012, the Commission trained 150 curriculum developers from 
the Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development (KICD) on how to infuse cohesion and integration 
issues in the education curriculum for primary and secondary schools.303
301 Ministry of Education, 2017 , Basic Education Framework, Available from: http:/ /www.education.go.ke/index.php/downloads/
file/632-basic-education-framework [25 October 2019]
302 National Cohesion and Integration Commission, 2014, Amani Club Guidelines, Available from: https:/ /cohesion.or.ke/index.
php/resources/downloads?download=7:amani-club-guidelines [30 October 2019]
303 National Cohesion and Integration Commission, 2015, Policy strategy 2015-2020, Available from: https:/ /www.cohesion.
or.ke/index.php/resources/policies-and-regulations [30 October 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
104Theme F  Capabilities / Competencies
Category A – Accessibility to All
5Among the broad strategies in the revised ICT Policy 2016 is facilitation of ICT based delivery 
systems in education.304 The policy provides that ICT is expected to be integrated seamlessly in 
teaching and learning across all levels of education with new methods of delivery and learner 
assessments. Under the basic education policy framework, ICT skills and training is offered to 
junior high school students to enable them to use technology in learning other subjects. In the 
senior high school levels, students who wish to continue pursuing computer studies go through 
the course with the aim of specializing in computer hardware and applications as a technical 
pathway.
To cater for learners with disabilities, the Kenya Institute of Special Education (KISE) was 
established as a semi-autonomous government agency under the Ministry of Education. KISE 
developed a sector policy for learners and trainees with disability to align education and 
training services for learners and trainees with disabilities with the relevant national policy 
frameworks.305 The Policy includes ICT training for curriculum delivery and ICT training for students 
with disabilities. However, the policy also notes challenges in ICT human resources that has led 
to under deployment of teachers with competent ICT skills to special schools all over the country.
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence of appropriate educational curricula at primary, secondary 
and tertiary levels
Substantial ICT training in primary schools mostly exists in private schools. In 2013, the government 
introduced ICT in the delivery of curriculum, starting with the lower primary. Under the government 
led digital literacy program, over 75,000 teachers in public primary schools were trained in 
readiness for the project implementation.306 However, the project did not succeed because of 
the challenges of poor connectivity to the electricity grid, lack of proper classroom facilities and 
insufficient skilled teachers. The Ministry of Education suspended issuance of tablets to class 
one pupils under the digital literacy programme, opting instead to build computer laboratories. 
Each of the 25,000 public primary schools were expected to get one computer laboratory.307 
There is no aggregate data on the number of schools connected to the Internet, or the proportion 
of learners who have Internet in schools. Kenya had a total of 94,399 educational institutions 
in 2018. There were 11,399 secondary schools, 37,910 primary schools, 2,289 technical 
vocational institutions, and 63 universities. In the same period, 896 secondary schools were 
304 Ministry of ICT, 2016, National ICT Policy, Available from: http:/ /icta.go.ke/pdf/National-ICT-Policy-20June2016.pdf [25 
October 2019]
305 Ministry of Education, 2018, Sector Policy for Learners and Trainees with Disabilities: http:/ /www.education.go.ke/index.
php/downloads/file/510-sector-policy-for-learners-and-trainees-with-disabilities
306 Ministry of ICT, Digital Literacy Programme(DLP), Available from: www.ict.go.ke/digital-literacy-programmedlp/ [15 September 
2019]
307 Ouma Wanzala, 25 February 2019, Daily Nation, Education ministry abandons Uhuru’s laptop project, Available from: 
https:/ /www.nation.co.ke/news/education/Ministry-abandons-laptop-project/2643604-4997644-10p9jfgz/index.html [3 
September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
105 Theme F Capabilities / Competencies 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5connected to broadband using satellites.308 There have been several initiatives to connect schools 
to the Internet. The Kenya Education Network in 2014, connected 240 schools in Nairobi 
through the School Connectivity Initiative, with mixed results.309 
In 2018, the Communications Authority announced that it had provided broadband connectivity 
through the USF to 896 public secondary schools spread across 47 counties, with Internet 
connection speeds of 5 Mbps downlink and 1 Mbps upload. In the project, the CA targeted 
to connect all the 8,500 public secondary schools to high-speed broadband connectivity over 
a five-year period in order to enhance the delivery of educational content and quality learning 
using ICT platforms.310 The Craft Silicon Foundation’s Mobile Lab equipped with 34 computers 
and supporting technology, converted a bus into a mobile and solar-powered ICT classroom. 
The bus has been used by over 6,000 young people in Nairobi311
AF.3 What proportion of the population and the workforce is skilled in 
the use of ICTs?
 ▶ Indicator: Proportion of Internet users with particular Internet skills, by skill level 
(basic, intermediate, advanced), aggregate and disaggregated
In a 2011 survey conducted by the International Data Corporation (IDC),312 82% of respondents 
indicated that they were confident in their skills to create a blog or web page. However, 10% 
were neutral, 8% were not confident, and 2% did not know. On using an Internet search engine, 
79% said they were confident, 12% were neutral, 8% were not confident, and 1% said they don’t 
know. On using email to communicate with others, 68% said they were confident, 12% were 
not confident, 12% were neutral, and 8% did not know. On finding, downloading and installing 
software, 49% said they were confident, 26% were not confident, 16% were neutral, and 9% 
did not know. On posting messages to chat rooms, newsgroups or online discussions, 29% 
said they were confident, 39% were not confident, 16% were neutral, and 16% did not know.
The National ICT Masterplan notes that the country does not have sufficient local high end skills, 
resulting in the local industry importing such skills.313 These high-end skills set are found in ICT 
308 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, 2019, Kenya Economic Survey 2019, Available from: https:/ /africaopendata.org/
dataset/kenya-economic-survey-2019/resource/5b9357a4-6227-4fbf-9e10-ae7043a41ce3 [7 September 2019]
309 KENET, Schools Connectivity Initiative, Available from: https:/ /schools.kenet.or.ke [15 September 2019]
310 Communications Authority, 3 June 2018, CA Connects 896 Public Schools To High-speed Internet, Available from: https:/ /
ca.go.ke/ca-connects-896-public-schools-to-high-speed-Internet/ [15 September 2019]
311 ITU, 30 August 2016, Craft Silicon Foundation’s Mobile Lab Teaches Digital Skills to Youth in Kenya, Available from: http:/ /
digitalinclusionnewslog.itu.int/2016/08/30/craft-silicon-foundations-mobile-lab-teaches-digital-skills-to-youth-in-kenya/ [7 
September 2019]
312 IDC, 201 1, Kenya ICT Board ICT Monitoring and Evaluation Indicators Study, Available from: http:/ /icta.go.ke/pdf/Julisha%20
Final%20Report%201.pdf [12 November 2019]
313 National ICT Masterplan http:/ /icta.go.ke/pdf/THE%20NATIONAL%20ICT%20MASTERPLAN%202017 .pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
106Theme F Capabilities / Competencies 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5professionals such as ICT projects managers, network engineers, network administrators, system 
administrators, application developers, and information system analysts who manage complex 
system design, development, and integration. 
Small and medium enterprise (SME) sector constitutes the largest proportion of businesses in 
Kenya. A recent study showed that ICT technology most widely used by the small and informal 
businesses in Kenya was the mobile phone, with 71.6% of respondents using their private mobile 
phones for business, and only 3.7% having a dedicated business phone.314 Further, the use of 
computers and the Internet was found to be limited, at 1.4% and 3.7% respectively. There is no 
data to show the proportion of skill level in the workplace. 
A 2017 UNESCO study also found that the number of students not achieving minimum proficiency 
levels in mathematics in sub-Saharan Africa for school going children in primary and lower 
secondary schools was 193 million representing 84% of all students, against a global average 
of 56%.315 In sub-Saharan Africa, only one in ten students reach a minimum level of proficiency in 
reading and mathematics.316 Globally, six out of ten children and adolescents are not achieving 
minimum proficiency levels in reading and mathematics. 
The UNESCO dataset on distribution of tertiary graduates in Kenya by field of study in 2016 shows 
that 5.97% of graduates being from Social Sciences, Journalism and Information programmes; 
7% from Natural Sciences, Mathematics and Statistics programmes; 5.26% from Information 
and Communication Technologies programmes; 4.22% from Engineering, Manufacturing and 
construction programmes; 2.75% from Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Veterinary programmes; 
16.48% from Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) programmes; and 82.03% 
from Programmes other than STEM. The percentage of males graduating with STEM subjects 
was 20.84% and females 11.19%. The percentage of males graduating with ICT courses was 
6.71% and females 3.50%.317 The report shows the total graduates in 2016 as 217,329 of 
which 98,301 were female, and the rest were male. Female graduates from Information and 
Technologies programmes in tertiary education were 30.1 percent; and 30.73 percent from 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics programmes.
314 State of ICT in Africa https:/ /researchictafrica.net/wp/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/After-Access_The-state-of-ICT-in-Kenya.
pdf 
315 UNESCO, 21 September 2017 , More Than One-Half of Children and Adolescents Are Not Learning Worldwide, Available 
from: http:/ /uis.unesco.org/sites/default/files/documents/fs46-more-than-half-children-not-learning-en-2017 .pdf [17 October 
2019]
316 UNESCO, 2019, Meeting commitments, are countries on track to achieve SDG4, Available from: http:/ /uis.unesco.org/sites/
default/files/documents/meeting-commitments-are-countries-on-track-achieve-sdg4.pdf [17 October 2019]
317 UNESCO, 2019, Education: Distribution of tertiary graduates by field of study, Available from: http:/ /data.uis.unesco.org/
index.aspx?queryid=163 [2 November 2019] 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
107 Theme F Capabilities / Competencies 
Category A – Accessibility to All
5Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
Policy Recommendations for Various 
Stakeholders
Government
• Invest in regular evidence-based research for decision-making and avail the research data 
for public consumption. Government agencies should work with research methodologies 
that are verifiable and can be interrogated by the public.
• Carry out regular studies on accessibility to provide for time comparison, and insights for 
policy intervention. Specifically, access gap studies with aggregated statistics on gender 
and location should be carried out on a regular basis.
• Be more proactive, through incentives and regulations, to promote competition in the 
provision of Internet services; last mile connectivity and Internet Exchange Points (IXPs). The 
entry barriers to Internet-based enterprises should be lowered through tax incentives and 
construction of publicly shared infrastructure such as telecommunication masts and ducts. 
This would lead to better quality of service and affordable prices. 
• Implement and periodically evaluate policies on access to information, cybersecurity and 
universal access.
• Offer online services in both English, Swahili and in local languages to serve those who 
cannot read and communicate in both english and Swahili. For the population that can neither 
read nor write, government website content should also include videos and infographics.
• Lower taxes for mobile phones to increase affordability among the citizens.
Academia
• Identify their needs and work on innovations that are tailored towards the creation of relevant 
local content that can drive demand for Internet access among the rural communities.
• Develop courses on digital literacy, for use in primary schools to the university level. 
Civil Society
• Advocate and work with other stakeholders to develop policies that promote Internet access.
• Consider providing Internet and its associated services, for organizations that provide 
critical cheaper services to communities, such as provision of water and affordable energy 
alternatives for cooking.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
108
Category A – Accessibility to All
5Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
Private Sector
• Invest in infrastructure in areas that are still unconnected or are not profitable as part of 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
• Offer free Internet services in exchange for other valuables such as advertisements and 
surveys. A good example of such models is Surf Kenya that is available in Western, Central 
and Coastal parts of Kenya.318
318 Surf Kenya, 2017 , Home | Surf Kenya, Available from: https:/ /www.surf.co.ke/ [22 September 2019]
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
109
Category A – Accessibility to All
51101116
CATEGORY M  
MULTI-
STAKEHOLDER 
PARTICIPATIONTHEME A  
Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
MA.1 Is there an overall policy, legal and regulatory framework for 
Internet development and policymaking which is consistent with 
international norms?
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of an overall framework consistent with relevant international 
norms
Article 2 of Kenya’s constitution319 affirms the supremacy of the constitution and states that it: 
‘is the supreme law of the Republic and binds all persons and all State organs at both levels 
of government’. Further, in subsection 6, it provides for ratification of all laws stating that “any 
treaty or convention ratified by Kenya shall form part of the law of Kenya under this constitution.” 
This means that Kenya is now a monist state, as international law automatically becomes part 
of the national law without a need for domestication. Accordingly, the country aligns with 
the international norms provided for in Article 2 (5) which provides that the “general rules of 
international law shall form part of the law of Kenya.”
Kenya is therefore bound by the provisions on freedom of expression in regional and international 
instruments. Such provisions include: Article 9 of the African Charter on Human and People’s 
Rights,320 Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,321 and Article 19 of the 
International Convention on Civil and Political Rights.322 As such, any person whose rights 
are violated or is threatened in regard to their activities online has a basis to seek redress in a 
court of law for the particular breach or the protection of the law. The African Commission on 
Human and Peoples Rights 323 has principles on freedom of expression to guide African states 
on implementation of the freedom of expression.
In addition, the country’s Constitution has a Bill of Rights considered progressive, and which 
applies and binds all citizens and State organs. It provides the broad structure that promotes 
freedom of expression. Article 33324 of the constitution provides that: “every person has the right 
319 The Constitution of Kenya. http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/index.php?id=398
320 The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights http:/ /www.achpr.org/files/instruments/achpr/banjul_charter.pdf
321 Universal Declaration on Human Rights. http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/UDHR/Documents/UDHR_Translations/eng.pdf
322 International Convention on Civil and Political Rights http:/ /www.ohchr.org/Documents/ProfessionalInterest/ccpr.pdf
323 African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights. http:/ /www.achpr.org/
324 Ibid.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
112Theme A  Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6to freedom of expression, which includes - freedom to seek, receive or impart information or 
ideas; freedom of artistic creativity; and academic freedom and freedom of scientific research.”
Further, the Bill of Rights provides for several fundamental rights and freedoms. They include the 
rights to privacy; access to information; to property; and to consumer protection. Others are 
the right to fair administrative action; access to justice and fair hearing; freedom of conscience, 
religion and opinion; freedom of expression; and freedom of the media.
Moreover, Article 21325 of the Constitution requires the State and every State organ to observe, 
respect, protect and fulfill the rights and fundamental freedoms in the Bill of Rights. The State is 
also required to enact and implement legislation to fulfill its international obligations in respect 
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Article 22 further addresses the question of legal 
standing in court and grants every person the right to institute court proceedings if a right 
or fundamental freedom in the Bill of Rights has been denied, violated or infringed, or is 
threatened.326
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of legal and regulatory frameworks to enable e-commerce, 
digital signatures, cybersecurity, data protection, and consumer protection
Kenya’s Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act 2018 assented to on May 30th 2018 aims 
to provide a legal framework for tackling cybercrime, including providing for investigation and 
prosecutorial procedures.327 However, the Act contains some controversial provisions such as the 
reintroduction of criminal defamation, and offences relating to fake news and false publications 
that in effect limit freedom of expression. Accordingly, its full implementation was suspended 
after the Bloggers Association of Kenya (BAKE) obtained a conservatory order that suspended 
the entry into force of 26 sections of the Act.328 BAKE challenged the law for contravening 
constitutional provisions on freedom of opinion, freedom of expression, freedom of the media, 
freedom and security of the person, right to privacy, right to property and the right to a fair 
hearing.329 Article 19 Eastern Africa supported BAKE’s position and described the controversial 
provisions as “extremely vague and ambiguous” and if sanctioned would allow for gagging 
of legitimate expression online.330 However, the case was dismissed on February 19, 2020, 
325 The Constitution of Kenya. http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/index.php?id=398
326 KHRC. The ICT legislative and policy environment in Kenya . 2014. https:/ /tinyurl.com/qmwersy
327 Kenya Gazette Supplement. The Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act, 2018.
 http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/ComputerMisuseandCybercrimesActNo5of2018.pdf
328 Africa Legal Network (ALN). Legal Alert | Kenya | High Court Suspends the Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act, 2018. 
https:/ /www.africalegalnetwork.com/legal-alert-kenya-high-court-suspends-computer-misuse-cybercrimes-act-2018/
329 Sections of Kenya’s Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act, 2018 Temporarily Suspended. https:/ /cipesa.org/2018/05/
sections-of-kenyas-computer-misuse-and-cybercrimes-act-2018-temporarily-suspended/
330 Article 19. Kenya: Suspension of Cybercrimes Act provisions a welcome step to protect free expression. June 05, 2018. https:/ /
www.article19.org/resources/kenya-suspension-of-cybercrimes-act-provisions-a-welcome-step-to-protect-free-expression/
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
113 Theme A Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6and the petition termed as unwarranted.331 This law was declared valid in its entirety. The law 
affects bloggers, journalists and Internet users, and provides for hefty penalties and long prison 
terms for cyber bullying and propagation of fake news.
Kenya’s Data Protection Act, 2019 became law on November 20, 2019 upon being assented 
by Kenya’s President.332 The Act gives effect to article 31 of Kenya’s Constitution which is on 
privacy. This Article provides that:
Every person has the right to privacy, which includes the right not to have—
1. Their person, home of property searched;
2. Their possessions seized;
3. Information relating to their family or private affairs unnecessarily required or 
revealed; or, 
4. The privacy of their communications infringed.
The Data Protection Act provides for the establishment of the office of the Data Commissioner, 
and lays down the rules for the protection of personal data by both public and private entities. 
However, the Act has been challenged in court by a renowned Activist, who claims that the Act 
was enacted through unconstitutional exercise as the Senate was blocked from inputting into the 
Act when it was a Bill. Further, that the Act is invalid as it contains unconstitutional provisions.333 
However, there are still a number of laws that protect the right to privacy of personal data. These 
include the Official Secrets Act; Children’s Act; HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act; Witness 
Protection Act; and the Banking Act. Others are the Credit Reference Bureau Regulations and 
Capital Markets Act; Access to Information Act; and the Public Archives and Documentation 
Service Act; the Kenya Information and Communications Act (KICA); Private Security Regulation 
Act; and the Elections (Technology) Regulations, 2017. 
Together with professional ethics and pronouncements of the courts, these laws regulate aspects 
of data processing in specific cases. However, they do not comprehensively cover all instances 
of data processing. For instance, educational institutions collect personal data of their students. 
These institutions are not beholden to protect the data from unauthorized access and use. In 
addition, online platforms that people use to access Internet services for example Facebook 
and Twitter are not subject to data protection licence conditions under the Kenya Information 
and Communication Act (KICA).
331 Maureen Kaka. Court dismisses bloggers’ cybercrime law case. February 20, 2020. Daily Nation. https:/ /www.nation.
co.ke/news/Court-dismisses-bloggers-case-challenging-cybercrime-law/1056-5462136-51snt7 /index.html
332 Business Daily. Uhuru signs the Data Protection Bill into law. November 8, 2019. https:/ /www.businessdailyafrica.com/
releases/Uhuru-signs-Data-Protection-Bill-into-law/1941082-5341658-njto1jz/index.html
333 Petition 454 of 219.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
114Theme A Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6Ecommerce and Digital signatures
Kenyans are able to conduct bank transactions online, and shop online. They can also trade or 
make payments using mobile money. Government services are accessible online and Kenyans 
can access government services through the ecitizen portal.334 In regard to digital signatures, the 
Kenya Information and Communication Act (KICA)335 section 83 (O) (3) defines what constitutes 
an electronic signature. Further, section 83 (P) provides what constitutes the legal recognition 
of electronic signatures.
THEME B  
National Internet Governance
MB.2 Does the government actively involve other stakeholder groups in 
developing national Internet policies and legislation?
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of arrangements for multistakeholder consultation and 
involvement in national policymaking institutions and processes concerned with the 
evolution and use of the Internet
Kenya has a multistakeholder model of policy making enshrined in its Constitution336 entrenched 
in Article 10 which requires the involvement of citizens in policy making processes, including 
whenever any State Organ, State Officers or public officers applies or interprets the Constitution; 
enacts, applies or interprets any law; or makes or implements public policy decisions. This 
requirement is considered as one of the national values and principles of governance. Others 
include: Patriotism, national unity, sharing and devolution of power, the rule of law, democracy 
and participation of the people. This article therefore places a constitutional requirement of public 
participation in any public policy making process. 
Where Internet policy is concerned, the National Communication Secretariat (NCS)337 in the 
Ministry of ICT, and the Communications Authority (CA)338 spearhead policy making processes. 
334 E-citizen: Services and information. https:/ /www.ecitizen.go.ke/ecitizen-services.html
335 Kenya Information and Communication Act (KICA). https:/ /kfcb.co.ke/wp-content/uploads/2016/07 /Kenya_Information_
and_Communications_Act.pdf
336 The Constitution of Kenya 2010
337 The National Communications Authority. https:/ /ncs.go.ke/index.php/about-us
338 Communications Authority of Kenya. https:/ /ca.go.ke/
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
115 Theme B  National Internet Governance
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6The NCS formulates policy papers, session papers and laws on ICT, while CA is responsible 
for facilitating the development of the information and communications sectors mostly through 
formulation of legislation. 
 ▶ Indicator: Policy and legal arrangements requiring public consultation and legal 
and practical arrangements for online consultation processes
CA usually calls for public participation even though sometimes the timeframe provided within 
which stakeholders should give input is often short and unrealistic for any meaningful input. 
The NCS also attempts to engage the public, with a key example being during the ICT policy 
review of 2016 where different industry stakeholders were involved in the review of this policy. 
Both institutions place public consultation notices on their websites, in newspapers and on 
television. These are also sometimes followed by face to face meetings with stakeholders where 
issues are raised and discussed, including those considered controversial. However, even with 
these consultations, there are times when input made by stakeholder groups is never reflected 
in final outcome documents. 
Other institutions charged with Internet policy development are the National Assembly and 
the Senate ICT Committees. Their work falls under the legislative role of Parliament, which is 
derived from the people.339 The two ICT Committees in line with the Parliamentary Standing 
Orders, usually call for public engagement through the newspapers, which are followed by 
public hearings after stakeholders have sent in their memos to the Clerks of the relevant houses of 
Parliament. This participation of citizens in law making processes is a constitutional requirement 
grounded in Article 118 (1) (b) which requires Parliament to “facilitate public participation and 
involvement in the legislative and other business of parliament and its committees.”340 Additionally, 
the National Assembly Standing Order 127 (3)341 requires the “departmental committee to 
which a Bill is committed to facilitate public participation and take into account the views and 
recommendations of the public when the committee makes its report to the house.” 
An example is where both the National Assembly and the Senate proposed legislation separately 
but called for public participation is the Data Protection Bill 2019. Both committees gazetted 
their public consultation announcements. The public participation engagements were set to be 
carried out across different parts of Kenya in line with the Standing Orders.342
339 The Constitution of Kenya: Role of Parliament. http:/ /www.klrc.go.ke/index.php/constitution-of-kenya/122-chapter-eight-the-
legislature/part-1-establishment-and-role-of-parliament/262-94-role-of-parliament
340 Article 1 18 of Kenya’s Constitution on Public Access and Participation. http:/ /www.kenyalaw.org:8181/exist/kenyalex/
actview.xql?actid=Const2010
341 Standing Orders of the National Assembly. Order 127 on Committal of Bills to Committees and public participation h t t p ://
www.parliament.go.ke/sites/default/files/2017-05/Standing_Orders_National_Assembly.pdf
342 Parliament sets public participation date for data protection bill 2019. https:/ /techweez.com/tag/national-assembly/
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
116Theme B National Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6Other proposed draft bills by Parliament have also been made available through online 
channels such as government websites. For example, the Kenya Information and Communication 
(Amendment) Bill 2019 (No. 61 of 2019 and No. 20 of 2019) was posted on the National 
Assembly website and stakeholders urged to send in a memorandum.343 
The Communications and Multimedia Appeals Tribunal established under the Kenya Information 
and Communications (Amendment) Act of 2013 has been reviewing its mandate to adjudicate 
disputes in the entire communications and multimedia sector. The Tribunal also put out a call for 
recommendations on the Judiciary website.344
Nevertheless, it is not always easy for the public to access bills tabled in Parliament345 or even 
in Newspapers especially if they cannot afford to purchase them on a daily basis, or have 
Internet access. Parliamentary notices in newspapers are seen by only about 2% of the Kenyan 
population.346 The notices are not usually placed on radio stations, despite the fact that they 
are accessed by 80% of Kenyans.347 In addition, there are times when the notice periods given 
for input by the public are very short. Further, as a result of security concerns, public access to 
Parliament buildings is highly controlled. 
Given the circumstances, it is difficult to monitor bills, including changes made in real time at 
different stages of the legislative process. The current process only allows for tracking of the bills 
and not the substantive content. It is worth noting that the National Assembly has published two 
bills on public participation. They are Public Participation bill (No.2) (National Assembly Bill 
No, 71 of 2019) which seeks to give effect to Article 10 of Kenya’s Constitution, through the 
provision of a general framework for effective participation. 
 ▶ Indicator:  Numbers of non-governmental stakeholders actively participating, by 
stakeholder group, disaggregated by sex
Different stakeholders drawn from the business, government, civil society, academia and others 
participate in ICT policy consultations. Usually they are motivated by different interests. Groups 
such as the Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTANet), Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA), 
the regulator the Communications Authority (CA) are active in different ICT public participation 
processes. Also, there is a lack of disaggregated data on stakeholders including the number of 
non-governmental stakeholder groupings that take part in consultations. 
343 Kenya Information and communication Amendment bill 2019.http:/ /parliament.go.ke/sites/default/files/2019-10/Kenya%20
Information%20and%20Communication%20%28Amendment%29%20Bill%2C%202019-No.2_compressed.pdf
344 Communications and Muilti-Media Tribunals.https:/ /www.judiciary.go.ke/communication-and-multimedia-appeals-
tribunal/#1535537953409-7184729a-b
345 Open Government Partnerships. Enhance Transparency in the Legislative Process (KE0012).https:/ /www.opengovpartnership.
org/members/kenya/commitments/KE0012/
346 Ibid.
347 ibid.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
117 Theme B National Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6MB.3 Is there a national Internet Governance Forum and/or other 
multistakeholder forum open to all stakeholders, with active 
participation from diverse stakeholder groups?
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of national IGF and/or other multistakeholder forum 
concerned with Internet governance
The social, economic and political environment has an impact on Internet governance engagement 
in Kenya. The ICT sector continues to play an increasingly important role in the economy of 
the country. It has high mobile penetration rate of above 100%348 and is ranked highest in the 
East Africa region. 
Kenya was among the first countries in Africa to host a national Internet Governance Forum (IGF). 
The Kenya IGF (KIGF), now in its 11th year, has been hailed as one of the continent’s success 
stories. The Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTANet)349 with the support of industry stakeholders350 
has convened the event since 2008. In 2008, Kenya with the support of the Geneva based 
Secretariat of the Internet Governance Forum hosted the first ever national Internet Governance 
Forum in Africa. The hosting was grounded on the outcomes of the World Summit on the 
Information Society’s (WSIS) Declaration of principles on International and regional cooperation 
whose Article 62 states that: 
Regional integration contributes to the development of the global Information Society 
and makes strong cooperation within and among regions indispensable. Regional 
dialogue should contribute to national capacity building and to the alignment of 
national strategies with the goals of this Declaration of Principles in a compatible way, 
while respecting national and regional particularities. In this context, we welcome 
and encourage the international community to support the ICT-related measures of 
such initiatives.351
In addition, the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society352 Articles 29-37 call for an Internet 
governance that is multistakeholder in nature. Article 31 states: 
We recognize that Internet governance, carried out according to the Geneva 
principles, is an essential element for a people-centred, inclusive, development-oriented 
348 Communications Authority of Kenya. SECOND QUARTER SECTOR STATISTICS REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 
(OCTOBER-DECEMBER 2019). https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Sector-Statistics-Report-Q2-2019-2020-1.pdf
349 The Network aims to act as a catalyst for reform in the ICT sector in support of the national aim of ICT-enabled growth and 
development. 
350 Githaiga, G. and Victor Kapiyo. 2017 . Pioneering Internet Governance in Africa  in GIWatch 2017 Edition, Kenya Chapter. 
https:/ /www.giswatch.org/sites/default/files/giswatch17_web.pdf
351 WSIS Declaration of Principles. http:/ /www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs/geneva/official/dop.html
352 WSIS 2003-2005 Tunis Agenda for the Information Society. https:/ /www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
118Theme B National Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6and non-discriminatory Information Society. Furthermore, we commit ourselves to the 
stability and security of the Internet as a global facility and to ensuring the requisite 
legitimacy of its governance, based on the full participation of all stakeholders, 
from both developed and developing countries, within their respective roles and 
responsibilities.
KICTANet continues to convene the KIGF, with the support of stakeholders and partners drawn 
from both state and non-state actors. The hosting of the KIGF is multistakeholder in nature in terms 
of choice of topics and their discussion, participants, and resources contribution.353 KICTANet 
has also hosted two editions of the sub-regional East Africa IGF, and the 2012 Africa IGF. 
Further, KICTANet was a key stakeholder member in organising and hosting the global IGF 
held in 2011 in Nairobi.354
KIGF is recognized as a National and Regional Initiative (NRIs) under the IGF global secretariat. 
Its outcomes feed into the global level IGF. Objectives of KIGF include:355 to bring together local 
stakeholders in open and inclusive dialogue; create opportunities to share best practices and 
experiences; identify emerging issues and bring them to the attention of the relevant bodies and 
the general public; and, contribute to capacity building for Internet governance. The forum is held 
in an informal setting, free from binding negotiations and brings together diverse stakeholders 
from government, private sector, technical community, academia and civil society to discuss 
Internet governance issues on an equal footing through an open and inclusive process.
In convening the KIGF, KICTANet adopts the global practice of having in place a multistakeholder 
Advisory Group (MAG), which is tasked with the responsibility of steering the forum. The MAG 
is diverse in nature and representative of diverse stakeholder groups. The topics that form into the 
discussions of the forum are crowd sourced from a variety of platforms including the KICTANet 
mailing list, skunkworks technical list and the security mailing lists. The conversations are also held 
on KICTANet’s social media handles including Twitter and Facebook to enhance participation. 
The MAG then groups the topics into broad themes and again these are subjected to voting 
by the stakeholders. The topics that carry the day then form the four main topics of discussion 
during the face to face convening.356 
Events such as the KIGF continue to play a crucial role in increasing regional participation at 
the global IGF. The multistakeholder model adopted in convening the KIGF continues to be 
improved with every year. Multistakeholderism continues to be reflected in the selection of 
topics to be discussed, as well as in funding with businesses, telcos, development partners and 
the regulator supporting the KIGF in one form or another. Support has included resources as 
353 KICTANet’s experience in KIGF convening over the years. 
354 Githaiga, G. and Victor Kapiyo. 2017 . Pioneering Internet Governance in Africa  in GIWatch 2017 Edition, Kenya Chapter. 
https:/ /www.giswatch.org/sites/default/files/giswatch17_web.pdf
355 1 1TH Edition Kenya Internet Governance Forum. https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/?page_id=401 15
356 Drawn from KICTANet’s experience of convening the KIGF.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
119 Theme B National Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6funds, connectivity, airtime, and so on. The same is also true of other ICT processes, although 
there have been instances where some stakeholders have been seen to wield more control than 
others. Nonetheless, this multistakeholder model in ICT policy making, if properly implemented, 
remains a powerful and useful model for public consultation. Increasingly, the various stakeholder 
groups are getting more organized and are capable of advancing convincing policy positions. 
 ▶ Indicator: Participation data for national IGF or other fora, aggregate and 
disaggregated by sex and stakeholder group, with particular attention to participation 
by selected groups (e.g. education ministries, SMEs, NGOs concerned with children, 
trades unions), and including arrangements for remote participation
The Kenya Internet Governance Forum throughout its eleven editions has maintained and 
endeavoured to have a balanced multistakeholder process which has diverse groupings. 
Representation has included government officers drawn from different ministries and sectors who 
participate in high panel discussions and give keynote speeches, private sector representation 
from some of the largest telco companies, small medium enterprises, civil society and youth.357 
Since 2017, KICTANet in collaboration with Watoto Watch Network,358 has held three Youth 
IGFs as pre-events at the KIGF. This Youth IGF was inaugurated in 2017.359 The youth IGF 
happens as a separate one day event, and the participants join the main Kenya IGF event where 
they are provided a slot in the programme to share the highlights of their discussions. The Youth 
IGF participants are students drawn from various schools and institutions and who contribute on 
different Internet governance issues affecting the youth.360 
Each of the last three editions of the Kenya IGF has had in attendance more than 200 participants 
of different genders, age and stakeholder groups. They have been drawn from government, the 
private sector, academia, the media, civil society, technical community and individual users all 
who deliberate on existing and emerging Internet-related matters. The forum is also streamed live 
and available online on multiple social media channels. Remote participation has also allowed 
for online conversation through dedicated Twitter hashtag for the specific year. This hashtag 
has been the country’s top trending topic for two consecutive days during the KIGF event. For 
instance in 2018, the event generated more than 2,000 tweets with estimated economic value 
was $18,321.1.361 
357 Internet Governance Forum Reports. https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/?page_id=401 15
358 Watoto Watch is a Non-profit organization raising awareness on Child Online Protection by implementing informative and 
sensitization programs on Internet safety. http:/ /watotowatchnetwork.org/
359 Watoto Watch Network Youth IGF https:/ /watotowatchnetwork.org/tag/kenya-youth-igf/
360 Youth IGF 2017 . https:/ /kigf.or.ke/category/youth-igf/
361 1 1th edition Kenya IGF https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/?page_id=401 15
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
120Theme B National Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6Moreover, KICTANet has managed to sustain multistakeholder representation and participation at 
national IGFs. However, more still needs to be done to have participation of different government 
ministries such as the Ministry of Education, SMEs, NGOs concerned with children, and trade 
unions. In addition, there is no disaggregated data of participants. Disaggregated data of 
participants from the different stakeholder groups can help in the evaluation and measurement of 
participation and will inform meaningful inclusion of various stakeholders in future engagements.
THEME C  
International and Regional 
Internet Governance
MC.2 Do government and other stakeholders from the country actively 
participate in major international for a concerned with ICTs and 
the Internet?
 ▶ Indicator: Number of government submissions to international fora concerned 
with ICTs and the Internet
Kenya is a member of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).362 Accordingly, the country 
is active in the meetings of the three sectors of the ITU that is: the ITU radiocommunication sector 
(ITU-R) where Kenya is the current Chair of the group; the International Telecommunication Union 
- Telecommunication (ITU-T) standardization sector; and, the International Telecommunication 
Union-Development (ITU- D).
The ITU-R ensures the effective use of the spectrum through the management of the radio frequency 
spectrum and standards for radio communications systems. The ITU-T works towards the promotion 
of agreed standards for telecommunications equipment and systems. ITU-D creates policies, 
regulations, strategies for finance and comes up with training programs in developing countries. 
Most members in these three sectors are drawn from governments. For Kenya, the only stakeholder 
who participates in these three meetings is Safaricom. Other stakeholders such as Airtel Networks 
and Silensec Africa Limited are listed but only attend the ITU-D meetings.363 There is also the 
362 List of ITU member states. https:/ /www.itu.int/online/mm/scripts/gensel8
363 Kenya. https:/ /www.itu.int/online/mm/scripts/gensel9?_ctryid=1000100574
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
121 Theme C  International and Regional Internet Governance
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6African Advanced Level Telecommunications Institute from Nairobi, which is the only academia, 
listed in the universal research category.364
 ▶ Indicator: Extent of involvement by government and other stakeholders in 
international standard-setting processes concerned with communications and the 
Internet
Kenya also participates in the ITU Plenipotentiary Conference365 which is the highest level meeting 
that takes place at the ITU every four years.366 At the conference, the 193 members review the 
last four years and agree on issues that they think are important, and which the ITU should focus 
on. Further, membership drawn from 193 member states agree on the ITU’s overall strategic 
plans and provide guidance and direction for the next four years. The conference takes place 
over a three-week period, with the first week dedicated to elections of the ITU leadership for the 
next four years, including the election of a new Secretary General. Kenya’s delegation is usually 
headed by the Minister of ICT or the Director General of regulator the CA. With the exception 
of 2012 which took a multistakeholder delegation to the World Conference on International 
Telecommunications (WCIT), Kenya’s delegation usually comprises mostly government officials 
drawn from the Ministry of ICT, the Communications Authority (CA), and a few members from 
the National Assembly. 
In 2012, the delegation from Kenya to WCIT 2012 was multistakeholder in nature. It 
comprised representatives from industry, technical community, civil society, media, academia 
and government.367 But since then, there was a change in leadership at the Ministry of ICT 
following a new government coming to power in 2013, whose approach to engagement has 
not been multistakeholder based. Since then, there have been hurdles for non-state actors to 
be accredited by the government to be part of the country delegations to treaty making ICT 
processes. This has been the case despite non-state actors petitioning the Ministers of ICT in 
2014 and in 2018 seeking accreditation for participation. In 2014, the Minister of ICT in his 
response to the request for accreditation by non-state actors, indicated that the Kenya Delegation 
had enough members. This is despite the fact that ITU does not restrict the number of delegates 
from a county, and in fact, encourages Member States to “have a good gender balance and a 
range of stakeholders from the public and private sectors, and civil society”.368
364 List with participants status. https:/ /www.itu.int/online/mm/scripts/gensel9?_ctryid=1000100574 
365 The Plenipotentiary Conference (or Plenipot) is an international treaty conference organised by the ITU every four years. 
366 The ITU Plenipotentiary Conference consists of the representatives of the Member States of the Union  
https:/ /www.itu.int/web/pp-18/en/page/1-about
367 Fighting for Internet Freedom: Dubai and Beyond : Joint Hearing Before the ...2013. Washington DC.  
https:/ /tinyurl.com/vgd4etb
368 ITU. Emerging Trends/ ICT4SDG/ITU Plenipotentiary Conference 2018 . October 29, 2018.https:/ /news.itu.int/what-you-
need-to-know-about-the-itu-plenipotentiary-conference-2018/ | ICT4SDG | I
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
122Theme C International and Regional Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6On both occasions, the Ministry of ICT did not offer valid reasons for declining to accredit the 
non-state actors to its delegation. However, the non-state stakeholders felt that there is some level 
of intolerance of any different views or perspectives by state actors.369 It is important to note 
that non-state actors through multistakeholder processes may at times have opposing viewpoints 
and recommendations that may be viewed as incompatible with what is agreed as an African 
Common position.370 Non-state actors have on several occasions pushed for Kenya to remain 
committed to the public interest values such as freedom of expression and free flow of information 
on the Internet, as well as upholding human rights obligations. Nevertheless, the non-state actors 
have found their way to these meetings through their own means and as a result of accreditation 
from foreign governments. Notably, in both 2014 and in 2018 (Busan and Dubai), and once 
at the venue, these non-state actors were invited to participate in the country’s deliberations, and 
on positions that Kenya took on different ICT topics. 
The Kenyan government also sends a delegation to the global Internet Governance Forum every 
year. The delegation usually comprises representatives from the Ministry of ICT, members of 
staff and board members from the sector regulator, and members of the National Assembly ICT 
Committee. The CA has also sent representatives to attend the World Summit on the Information 
Society (WSIS) though there has been no consistency in attendance. 
In terms of participants to this meeting, the disaggregated data is not available. Further, the 
list of participants to the ITU meetings is not made public as is only available to members who 
have an ITU TIES account.371
MC.3 Does the government and do other stakeholders participate 
actively in ICANN?
 ▶ Indicator:  Membership of and active participation in ICANN’s Governmental 
Advisory Committee (GAC)
The Government Advisory Committee (GAC) is an ICANN advisory committee, set up under 
the ICANN By-laws. Its task is to advise ICANN on Domain Name System (DNS) public policy 
concerns. Kenya participates in ICANN and is a member of the Government Advisory Committee 
(GAC).372 Currently three members, that is two drawn from the Communications Authority (CA), 
369 KICTANet’s experience during the 2014 and 2018 Plenipots in Busan and Dubai respectively.
370 The African common position is based on the African countries coming together as the African block, and is based on political 
interests.
371 TIES (Telecommunication Information Exchange Service) is a set of networked information resources and services offered 
by ITU without any charge to ITU Members (Member States, Sector Members, Associates, and Academia) to support their 
participation in the activities of the Union.
372 About GAC. https:/ /gac.icann.org/about/members
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
123 Theme C International and Regional Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6and one from the Ministry of ICT are designated as members.373 Currently, it is not clear how 
actively the three members participate in the GAC meetings. Previously, Kenya was very active 
in GAC and was able to bid to host ICANN 37.374 Kenya was active for a period spanning 
10 to 13 years and contributed substantially to various policy documents and processes such 
as the Generic Top Level Domain (GTLD) guidebook to accountability.375 Kenya was also active 
in supporting the Africa Union’s dot. Africa (.africa) work.“ We were a force to be reckoned 
with” avers Alice Munyua. 
In May 2016, ICANN established an African engagement office in Nairobi to support efforts 
of the global stakeholder engagement team in Africa, and promote capacity building in the 
domain name space in Africa.376 In January 2017, GAC with the support of the Communications 
Authority (CA) conducted its first capacity building workshop in Kenya on “Harnessing the 
Potential of the Africa GAC Members for better Participation in ICANN.” This was specifically 
for Africa GAC members.377 Kenya’s ICT Minister delivered the keynote address. 
 ▶ Indicator: Membership of and active participation in ICANN constituencies, 
working groups and other fora.
Other than in GAC, Kenya is also represented in different ICANN constituencies. Several 
Kenyans are active in various constituencies and Working Groups at ICANN.378 For Example 
Kenyans are present in the following groups:
1. Expedited Policy Development Process (EPDP) working group:379 The EPDP role is to review 
the Temporary Registration Data Specification on gTLD. It then decides whether it should 
become an ICANN Consensus Policy as it is, or whether it should be revised in accordance 
with the GDPR and other relevant privacy and data protection laws and regulations.
2. The Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) Caucus380 gives direction to the 
ICANN community and Board on the security and integrity concerns related to the allocation 
on the Internet naming and address systems. 
373 About GAC Membership. https:/ /gac.icann.org/about/members
374 ICANN meetings. https:/ /archive.icann.org/en/meetings/nairobi2010/
375 Interview with Alice Munyua who was GAC’s vice chair for two years. She was the founding Chair of the Public safety 
working group which she served for 3 years, and the Under-served regions working group for 3 year. The two groups are 
under GAC. November 20, 2019.
376 ICANN Launches African Engagement Office In Nairobi. https:/ /www.icann.org/news/blog/icann-launches-african-
engagement-office-in-nairobi
377 ICANN Holds the First Capacity Building Workshop for African GAC Members. https:/ /www.icann.org/news/announcement-
2017-01-13-en
378 Interview with Bob Ochieng ICANN, 8th October 2019
379 Initial Report of the Expedited Policy Development Process (EPDP) on the Temporary Specification for gTLD Registration Data 
Team. https:/ /www.icann.org/public-comments/epdp-gtld-registration-data-specs-initial-2018-1 1-21-en
380 Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) Caucus. https:/ /www.icann.org/groups/ssac
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
124Theme C International and Regional Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
63. The Country Code Names Supporting Organisation (ccNSO) Council381 which is the forum 
where country code Top Level Domain (ccTLD) managers come together and raise concerns 
from a global perspective on the topical issues of ccTLDs.
4. At-Large Advisory Committee (ALAC)382 liaison to the ccNSO. ALAC is the place for individual 
Internet user’s voices and concerns.
5. NextGEN selection committee,383 where those selected to participate in this program are 
coached and receive travel support. They are mostly students from Continent countries where 
there is a specific ICANN meeting.
6. Kenya was also in the leadership of the Non Commercial Users Constituency (NCUC) for 
three years (2014-2016).384 This is the maximum that a leader can serve in one position. 
NCUC’s role in ICANN is to ensure that the voices of the non-commercial users are heard 
at ICANN. 
Challenges
Multistakeholderism in ICT policy making seeks to bring together diverse groups such as 
the government, industry, technical experts and civil society – to engage in the design and 
implementation of policy standards. The concept underpinning this model is that all actors 
that make a significant contribution to the digital governance system should participate in a 
consensus decision representing a collection of agreed viewpoints rather than a single source 
of confirmation, and thus gain legitimacy. However, sometimes efforts to build a meaningfully 
inclusive multistakeholder approach are undermined by mistrust among stakeholders. This has 
seen instances where some stakeholders have been excluded in some policy making process, 
or their positions not being reflected in the final outcome documents.
Further, in instances where the ICT committees of the National Assembly and Senate, as well as 
the Communication Authority have called for public participation on laws, a low engagement 
of ordinary citizens has been witnessed. This is either due to lack of understanding on how ICT 
policy processes relate to them, or have missed the announcement calling for public participation 
mostly placed in daily newspapers.
Another challenge noted is that sometimes people have participated in these policy engagements, 
but feel that the processes lack seriousness as there is no criteria on how to participate, forms 
of redress and feedback mechanisms. Therefore, they appear to be exercises of ticking the box 
to fulfil a constitutional requirement.
381 Country Code Names Supporting Organisation (ccNSO) https:/ /ccnso.icann.org/en
382 ALAC. https:/ /atlarge.icann.org/alac
383 NextGen @ICANN. https:/ /www.icann.org/public-responsibility-support/nextgen
384 Non Commercial Users Constituency. https:/ /www.ncuc.org/
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
125 Theme C International and Regional Internet Governance 
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
Policy Recommendations for Various 
Stakeholders
Government
• Enact public participation legislation and policy framework to guide the public participation 
process. The framework should provide for the avenues, thresholds, timelines and formats for 
citizen engagement while also ensuring access to draft bills, and reporting back structures 
and mechanisms.
• Create a Public Participation Authority to enforce public participation between agencies 
making decisions and the public and match public participation tools to objectives.
• Facilitate citizen engagement with Parliament and County Assemblies through alternative 
media, including radio and mobile phones. 
• Adopt open-source platforms to enhance internal parliamentary and County Assembly 
communication and also facilitate information sharing with the public.
• Provide access to weekly Senate, National Assembly, County Assembly plenary and 
committee proceedings by leveraging on both traditional and new media.
• Promote multistakeholder participation by having an open-door policy on policy formulation 
process on Internet governance discussions at national and county levels. 
• Encourage multistakeholder participation in policy making on ICT issues. 
• Have multistakeholder delegations comprising the government, industry, technical experts 
and civil society to treaty making conferences. 
• Leverage social media for expanded public engagement.
• Encourage counties to invest in ICTs. 
• Support county governments possibly through USF to interpret policies in local dialects and 
conduct public participation. 
Civil Society
• Conduct research and document data on all multistakeholder engagements to track 
participation, and monitor inclusion, diversity and stakeholder representation.
• Engage the national and county governments on ICT policy initiatives as well as find ways to 
collaborate or utilize the existing policy structures and processes to foster good governance. 
• Hold the government accountable to transparent and open multistakeholder participation 
in Internet-related policy processes.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
126
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
6Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
• Advocate for balanced and inclusive stakeholder representation at national, regional and 
international Internet governance forums.
• Foster more inclusive participation on Internet governance issues from under-represented 
groups such as women, persons with disabilities and marginalized communities.
Private Sector
• Collaborate with industry stakeholders in engaging the government on proposed legislation 
or proposing amendments on policies and laws, and initiating policies that allow for a 
conducive business environment.
• Train other stakeholders to understand and get appraised on existing policy concerns.  
Technical Community
• Cultivate interest and participate in policy making processes together with other stakeholders. 
• Advocate for an enabling environment to operate in, including for innovation and favourable 
work conditions. 
Academia
• Conduct evidence-based research on emerging issues that touch on multistakeholderism.
• Provide evidence-based recommendations on how multistakeholderism can be strengthened. 
• Disseminate research findings widely and on different platforms to ensure it reaches different 
stakeholders.
• Champion for multistakeholderism curriculum on development and design in learning systems.
Media
• Report and cover more news stories on Internet governance and the multistakeholder nature 
of Internet governance. 
• Sensitize and promote awareness to citizens on Internet governance issues, in a timely 
fashion.
• Engage in national, regional and global forums to understand and build knowledge in the 
area of Internet governance.
Individual Users
• Cultivate interest, and endeavor to participate in awareness creation programs on Internet 
governance and the meaning of multistakeholderism.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
127
Category M – Multi-stakeholder participation
61281297
CATEGORY X  
CROSS-CUTTING 
INDICATORSTHEME A  
Gender
XA.1 Are the interests and needs of women and girls explicitly included 
in national strategies and policies for Internet development, and 
effectively monitored? 
 ▶ Indicator: National strategies include explicit consideration of a) women’s 
needs relating to the Internet and b) the potential of the Internet to support women’s 
empowerment and gender equality
The Internet has experienced significant growth in Kenya, a situation characterized by the 
early adoption of the Internet, and an enabling regulatory and policy environment. These have 
contributed to the evolution of a dynamic technology ecosystem supported by the government, 
private sector, civil society, and citizenry actors, and founded on a robust infrastructure. 
There are various laws and policies in Kenya which broadly promote equity on the Internet among 
genders namely: Vision 2030, the Constitution, the National Gender and Equality Act (2011), 
the Data Protection Act (2019), the Digital Economy Blueprint (2019), the Kenya National ICT 
Master Plan 2014 - 2017, and the National Information & Communications Technology (ICT) 
Policy 2016.
The Vision 2030 blueprint was launched in 2030 as a means to accelerate Kenya’s transformation 
into an industrialized country by 2030. It emphasizes the need for gender equity in the distribution 
of power and resources, improved livelihoods for vulnerable groups, and responsive, globally 
competitive youth. 
Article 27 of the Constitution provides that all citizens are equal and entitled to freedom from 
discrimination. The National Gender and Equality Act (2011)385 provides for the promotion 
of gender equality and freedom from discrimination, and additionally to “establish, consistent 
with data protection legislation, databases on issues relating to equality and freedom from 
discrimination for different affected interest groups and produce periodic reports or national, 
regional and international reporting on progress in the realization of equality and freedom from 
discrimination for these interest groups”.386
385 The National Gender and Equality Act (http:/ /extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/ken12841 1.pdf)
386 ibid
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
130Theme A  Gender
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7The Kenya Digital Economy Blueprint387 has as its mission: “a nation where every citizen, 
enterprise and organization has digital access and the capability to participate and thrive in 
the digital economy.” The blueprint articulates five core areas of emphasis as follows: Digital 
Government; Digital Business; Infrastructure; Innovation-Driven Entrepreneurship and Digital Skills 
and Values. 
Additionally, the government has more specifically articulated gender equity in the ICT sector in 
the National ICT Master Plan388 and the National ICT Policy 2016.389 The former includes the 
provision of equitable, non-discriminatory access to ICTS to women, youth and disadvantaged 
communities; and the promotion of Kenyan ICT companies through local procurement and 
export promotion. 
The draft National ICT Policy 2016390 is an updated version of policy developed a decade 
previously and has among its objectives the giving of “special attention to providing new learning 
and ICT access opportunities for women and youth, the disabled and disadvantaged, particularly 
disenfranchised and illiterate people, in order to address social inequities”.391 
To achieve the policy objectives, draft National ICT Policy 2016392 called for the creation of 
opportunities and assisting various groups, including women, to acquire ICT skills. Additionally, 
it called for “engaging of women, youth and children, communities in underserved areas, 
and other disadvantaged groups, including people with disabilities, through e-inclusion and 
e-accessibility activities and programmes”. 
 ▶ Indicator: Numbers of women and men in senior policymaking positions in 
government concerned with ICTs/Internet 
The number of women and men in senior policy making positions in government bodies concerned 
with ICTs and the Internet reflects global trends where the leadership and management in most 
organizations concerned with ICT policy in Kenya tends to be mostly male. As shown in the table 
below, the Communications Authority of Kenya has 13 members on the management team, 3 
of whom are women. The 9-member Senate Committee on Information, Communication and 
Technology has 2 women and 7 men. However, there are policy making initiatives, such as 
the Kenya ICT Authority, where women make up the majority in the management team of five. 
387 Digital Economy Blueprint (https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Kenyas-Digital-Economy-Blueprint.pdf)
388 National ICT Master Plan (http:/ /icta.go.ke/national-ict-masterplan/)
389 National ICT Policy (http:/ /icta.go.ke/national-ict-policy/)
390 National ICT Master Plan (http:/ /icta.go.ke/national-ict-masterplan/)
391 Ndung’u, M.N., Lewis, C., & Mothobi, O. (2019). After access: The state of ICT in Kenya. Policy Paper No. 9, Series 5. 
Research ICT Africa (p. 37). https:/ /researchictafrica.net/wp/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/After-Access_The-state-of-ICT-
in-Kenya.pdf 
392 ibid
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
131 Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7Table 10. Ratio of Men to women in leadership/management roles at ICT-
related entities in Kenya
Organization Leadership Men:Women 
ratioTop leadership 
post held by a 
woman
Communications Authority of Kenya39313 10:3 Acting Director-General
Senate Committee on Information, 
Communication and Technology9 7:2 Vice chair
Kenya ICT Authority Board of Directors39410 6:4 Chief Executive Officer
Kenya ICT Authority Management3955 2:3 Chief Executive Officer
Konza Technopolis Development Authority 
Board of Directors3969 7:2 Member
Konza Technopolis Development Authority 
Board Management39711 6:5 Manager
 ▶ Indicators: Extent of disaggregation of available data on ICT access and use 
by sex 
There are a variety of research studies and reports generated by academics, government, and 
civil society organizations concerning ICT use and access by gender in Kenya. However, a 
greater variety of studies would need to be done to gain a more widespread and consistent 
perspective. 
A 2019 study398 established that most non-Internet users (84%) were based in the rural areas, 
and a majority (58%) were female. The National ICT survey399 indicated that the access to 
ICT equipment differed between women and men, with men having a higher proportion of 
their population having access to ICTs compared to the women. For men, 60.8% had access 
to mobile phones while 58.9% of women had access to mobile phones, a difference of 1.8 
percentage points. The access to computers and to the Internet for both males and females in 
2010 was each below 10% of the sampled population for each gender, with men having a 
marginally higher number compared to the women.
393 Communications Authority of Kenya - About us https:/ /ca.go.ke/about-us/ 
394 Kenya ICT Authority - Board of Directors http:/ /icta.go.ke/board-of-directors/ 
395 Kenya ICT Authority - Management http:/ /icta.go.ke/management-team/  
396 Board of Directors - Konza Technopolis http:/ /konza.go.ke/board-of-directors/ 
397 Management - Konza Technopolis (https:/ /www.konza.go.ke/management/)
398 Ndung’u, M.N., Lewis, C., & Mothobi, O. (2019). After access: The state of ICT in Kenya. Policy Paper No. 9, Series 5. 
Research ICT Africa
399 National ICT Survey 2010 http:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/National-ICT-Survey.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
132Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7In terms of averages, the two genders differ in the average use of mobile phones to call. During 
the seven days before the survey was conducted as shown in the table below.
Table 11. Kenya Mobile phone use in seven days prior to survey (2010)
Use of mobile phone 
in last 12 months (%)Number of 
times usedLength of 
use (Mins)Cost (KSh)
Men 53.6 24.5 67.1 272.3
Women 51.4 17.5 42.0 173.8
Source: Communications Authority of Kenya, 2010
In terms of usage of computers within the previous 12 months before the study was conducted, 
the Communications Authority of Kenya (2010)400 observed the following:
Table 12. Reported use of computers by gender in Kenya (2010) 
  Places Computers are Used (%)
 Had used a 
computer (%)Own 
homeFriend’s 
houseWork 
placeCyber 
cafeCommunity 
centreEducational 
institutionMobile 
phone
Men 9.5% 24.4 2.2 24.0 28.7 2.3 13.3 6.5
Women 7.3% 21.4 1.2 16.4 28.2 1.8 17.1 4.7
Source: Communications Authority
The data shows that the male respondents compared to the female respondents had greater 
access to computers and mobile phones, and to computers in the workplace. For both genders, 
more than a quarter of the women and men accessed computers in a cybercafe. A greater 
proportion of female respondents (17.1%) compared to the male respondents (13.3%) used 
computers in schools/educational settings.
More recently, a 2019 GSMA401 report indicated that women in Kenya were 6% less likely 
to own a mobile phone compared to men. Further, there was a 29% difference in monthly 
expenditure on mobile services for men and women. The table below shows the continued 
disparities in ICT access between men and women.
400 National ICT Survey 2010 http:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/National-ICT-Survey.pdf 
401 GSMA - The mobile economy sub-Saharan Africa 2019 https:/ /www.gsma.com/r/mobileeconomy/sub-saharan-africa/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
133 Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7Table 13. ICT access and s gender statistics
 Women (%) Men (%)
%age of adult population who own a mobile phone 82 86
%age of adult mobile Internet users 26 43
Awareness of mobile Internet among genders 62 78
Source: GSMA402 
While the difference in mobile phone ownership between genders showed a 4% difference, the 
gap is larger with regards to gender access and awareness of mobile Internet. The GSMA403 
report indicated that just over a quarter of the women sampled used mobile Internet as compared 
to more than two fifths of men. Additionally, a greater proportion of men (78%) were aware of 
mobile Internet as compared to 62% of women.
A study of mobile telephony use in rural Kenya established that mobile phone sharing was 
the norm in some rural contexts, and offered both advantages and disadvantages.404 It could 
allow communal sharing of information such as news listened to dysonon mobile radio, gather 
people, and encourage interpersonal communication. But it could also expose one’s information 
to others. In one instance, a woman’s illiteracy made her dependent on other people, such as 
her husband or someone else to know the contents of messages sent to her. 
The study also noted that the situation introduced “limitations to social interactions, consequently 
affecting issues of gender roles, power differentiation and shifts in time and space. It is worth 
noting that even as there remain discrepancies in Internet and ICT access and use, there are 
illustrations of Kenyann women’s achievements in the sector. There are a plethora of commercial, 
non-profit, and civil society technology organizations founded and/or run by women, some of 
which have received global recognition such as Ushahidi405 and Akirachix. 406
402 ibid
403 ibid
404 Komen, L. (2017). Mobile telephony and copresence in Marakwet, Kenya. Journal of Development and Communication 
Studies, 5  44. 10.4314/jdcs.v5i1.3.
405 Dyson, E. (2014, April 24). Ory Okolloh. Retrieved from https:/ /time.com/70848/ory-okolloh-2014-time-100/
406 Lionesses of Africa (2015, Nov. 18). Judith Owigar: The startup story of a visionary Kenyan techpreneur working to make a huge 
impact by nurturing the talents of women in technology. Retrieved from http:/ /www.lionessesofafrica.com/blog/2015/1 1/18/
the-startup-story-of-judith-owigar; and Rotich, J. (2013, June 18). Meet BRCK, Internet access built for Africa. Retrieved from 
https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=qsJYrwzfd6w
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
134Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7 ▶ Indicator: Existence of national mechanisms to monitor women’s inclusion in 
strategies for Internet access and use 
The National ICT Master Plan 2014 - 2017407 identified various activities and projects but did 
not have a structured monitoring and evaluation process to evaluate the project’s implementation. 
This resulted in the absence of publicly available documentation to assess how well women had 
been included in strategies related to Internet access and use.408 However, a Task Force has since 
been constituted to review the Master Plan 2014-2017 with digital inclusivity identified among 
the principles that will guide future implementation. Digital inclusivity is defined as “the equitable 
and non-discriminate availability of and access to ICTs across county governments, urban and 
rural areas, gender, women, youth, the marginalized and people living with disabilities”.409
XA.2 Is there a gender digital divide in Internet access and use and, if 
so, is this gender divide growing, stable or diminishing? 
 ▶ Indicator: Proportions of individuals using the Internet, disaggregated by sex, 
compared with gender gaps in income and educational attainment. 
An International Telecommunication Union (ITU) report410 indicated that while many regions 
globally had experienced shrinkage in the gender digital divide, Africa had experienced an 
expansion. Also, that the proportion of women on the continent using the Internet was 25% 
lower than that of men.
There continues to be a gender divide in Internet access and use in Kenya, particularly so in 
the rural areas.411 But it is not sufficiently clear what the nature of the gap is particularly given 
the limited research on rural communities, as a recent study412 revealed that “… statistics touting 
increases in mobile phone ownership (and Internet access) reveal little about spatial differences 
despite knowledge of the infrastructural differences that exist between rural and urban areas. 
Access statistics provided by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and Socialbakers.
com make it abundantly clear that handset ownership and Internet access are growing in Africa. 
407 National Master Plan 2014-2017 http:/ /icta.go.ke/pdf/THE%20NATIONAL%20ICT%20MASTERPLAN%202017 .pdf 
408 Ndung’u, M.N., Lewis, C., & Mothobi, O. (2019). After access: The state of ICT in Kenya. Policy Paper No. 9, Series 5. 
Research ICT Africa
409 ibid
410 ITU (2017). ICT facts and figure 2017 . Retrieved from https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/
ICTFactsFigures2017 .pdf
411 Ndung’u, M.N., Lewis, C., & Mothobi, O. (2019). After access: The state of ICT in Kenya. Policy Paper No. 9, Series 5. 
Research ICT Africa
412 Komen, L. (2017). Mobile telephony and copresence in Marakwet, Kenya. Journal of Development and Communication 
Studies, 5  44. 10.4314/jdcs.v5i1.3.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
135 Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7However, they do not provide information about how poor mobile networks, limited electricity, 
and persistent poverty— common features of rural life—affect ownership and access”.413 
A 2008 study414 established that men were the first to have phones in rural Kenya. Other findings 
were that rural women often had second-hand phones which limited their access to information, 
and had other costs to maintain such as repair, including buying or recharging old batteries. 
The phones were used to send or receive texts, receive M-pesa monies, and to use a torch or 
radio. For many of the rural women studied, the Internet and using the phone to access it were 
new and time-consuming activities, and were not priorities in their busy day-to-day lives.415 
 ▶ Indicator: Proportions of adult women and men with mobile broadband 
subscriptions disaggregated by sex, compared with gender gaps in income and 
educational attainment. 
Mobile broadband has contributed greatly to ICT development and tends to be more affordable 
than fixed broadband in most developing countries.416 In Kenya, the number of mobile broadband 
subscriptions in Kenya rose from 20.5 million to 22.2 million between June 2018 and June 
2019, accounting for 44.5% of the total data/Internet subscriptions. However, the CA, or the 
telecom providers do not provide data disaggregated by gender with which to assess against 
income and gender levels. 
 ▶ Indicator: Survey data on Internet awareness and on patterns of Internet use, 
disaggregated by sex 
The Communications Authority of Kenya (2019)417 releases quarterly sector statistics which are 
based on data provided by Internet and mobile phone service providers. In the April - June 2019 
quarter, there were 52 million active mobile phone SIM cards with an estimated 96% mobile 
network coverage. There were also 50 million Internet subscriptions during the same period.
This is a steep rise compared to statistics from September 2015, which showed the number of 
Internet users in Kenya stood at 31.9 million, which was estimated at Internet access rate of 
74 for every 100 people. There were 36.1 million mobile subscriptions while mobile phone 
penetration stood at 88.1 percent. Moreover, mobile data subscriptions contributed to 99 
413 Wyche, S., & Olson, J. (2018). Kenyan women’s rural realities, mobile Internet access, and “Africa Rising.” Information 
Technologies & International Development (Special Section), 14, 33–47 .
414 ibid
415 ibid
416 ITU (2017). ICT facts and figure 2017 . Retrieved from https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/
ICTFactsFigures2017 .pdf
417 Communications Authority of Kenya (2019). Fourth quarter sector statistics report for the financial year 2018/2019 (April – June 
2019). Nairobi, Kenya: Communications Authority of Kenya.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
136Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7percent of total Internet subscriptions, which stood at 21.6 million. This is attributed to the entry 
of cheaper Internet-enabled phones into the market in recent years. The Communications Authority 
of Kenya does not typically disaggregate the quarterly statistics report by gender.
 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use, and of the value of 
Internet access and use, disaggregated by sex 
Multiple factors pose barriers to access and use of the Internet, including access to computers 
or mobile phones, the costs of purchasing Internet-enabled phones, of purchasing phones, the 
socio-cultural context such as in rural areas where a woman was more likely to have a second-
hand phone which had limited features, and old batteries.418
As Jensen and Mahan point out: “Gendered indicators ostensibly continue to be at the top of 
everyone’s agendas,”419 yet “none of the major ICT or science and technology frameworks 
disaggregate data and indicators based on gender, and the major gender equality indexes 
also do not incorporate ICT and science and technology.”
XA.5 Do the law, law enforcement and judicial processes protect 
women and girls against online gender-based harassment and 
violence? 
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of a relevant legal framework and judicial processes 
The Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes law420 criminalizes abuse on social media and 
cyberbullying. However, one study found that there were inadequate reporting mechanisms 
on social media, law officials were not adequately equipped or were they all aware of cyber 
crimes; bureaucracy in the law enforcement setting discouraged victims from reporting abuse.421 
A variety of digital safety programs are run by a variety of organizations, targeting journalists, 
students, and bloggers. However, a greater variety of digital safety awareness and training 
sessions would be of value as a form of curbing online violations. 
418 Komen, L. (2017). Mobile telephony and copresence in Marakwet, Kenya. Journal of Development and Communication 
Studies, 5  44. 10.4314/jdcs.v5i1.3. And Wyche, S., & Olson, J. (2018). Kenyan women’s rural realities, mobile Internet 
access, and “Africa Rising.” Information Technologies & International Development (Special Section), 14, 33–47 .
419 Huyer, Sophia & Hafkin, Nancy. (2018). Engendering the Knowledge Society: Measuring Women’s Participation. 10.13140/
RG.2.2.18752.64003. https:/ /www.researchgate.net/publication/323402205_Engendering_the_Knowledge_Society_
Measuring_Women’s_Participation 
420 The Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act 2018 (http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/
ComputerMisuseandCybercrimesActNo5of2018.pdf)
421 Ongoma, N. & Wandia, T. (2018). Women and online violence in Kenya. Nairobi, Kenya: Ford Foundation 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
137 Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7 ▶ Indicator: Incidence of online gender-based harassment and violence experienced 
by women and girls 
Various studies have found that women have often been attacked online, mostly on social 
media. A 2014 Pew Research study422 found that 40% of Internet users had experienced online 
harassment, with stalking and sexual harassment being more prevalent among young women 
compared to young men or to older counterparts. 
Several studies undertaken in the Kenyan context established high levels of online harassment 
among women, many of them sexual in nature. Modes of attack include sexual harassment, 
surveillance, cyber stalking, and unauthorized use of images, videos or other personal information, 
fraud, cyber bullying, doxing, verbal abuse, revenge porn, hacking of accounts, and extra 
judicial threats.423
Further, two studies undertaken in 2010424 and 2013425 explored cybercrime statistics in 
the Kenya context with an emphasis on women’s experiences. The 2020 Kictanet426 study 
defined cybercrime as “any activity on the Internet that offends human sensibilities,” and 
further categorised cybercrimes into three categories as follows: against a person, property, or 
government. Harassment and stalking were identified as leading crimes against women online. 
The 2013 KICTANet427 study identified various forms of technology-based violence against 
women as follows: digital manipulation of photos, circulation of intimate photos, harassment 
through cell phones, cyberstalking, gender stereotypical comments, and hate crimes. Tools used 
to perpetrate these crimes included mobile phones, social media, email, and mailing lists.
Moreover, a 2018 study428 noted that even as the number of Internet users continued to grow, 
there were accompanying threats including limited digital illiteracy and lack of awareness 
of the threats. The respondents in this study noted that the outcome of the violations included 
422 Pew Research Center (2014). Online harassment. Retrieved from https:/ /www.pewresearch.org/Internet/wp-content/uploads/
sites/9/2014/10/PI_OnlineHarassment_72815.pdf
423 Article 19 (2016). Women journalists’ digital security. Nairobi, Kenya: Article 19 Eastern Africa and Ongoma, N. & Wandia, 
T. (2018). Women and online violence in Kenya. Nairobi, Kenya: Ford Foundation 
424 Kictanet (2010). Women and cybercrime in Kenya: The dark side of ICTS (Working document Vol. 1). Retrieved from https:/ /
www.kictanet.or.ke/documents/Activities/Women-and-CyberCrime-in-KE/Women_and_Cybercrime_in_Kenya_Literature_
Review_report_working_ver4.pdf
425 KIctanet (2013). Women and cybercrime: The dark side of ICTs (2nd ed.). Retrieved from https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/Activities/
Women-and-CyberCrime-in-KE/Kenya_Study-Women-and-Cybercrime-2nd-Edition-2013.pdf
426 Kictanet (2010). Women and cybercrime in Kenya: The dark side of ICTS (Working document Vol. 1). Retrieved from https:/ /
www.kictanet.or.ke/documents/Activities/Women-and-CyberCrime-in-KE/Women_and_Cybercrime_in_Kenya_Literature_
Review_report_working_ver4.pdf
427 KIctanet (2013). Women and cybercrime: The dark side of ICTs (2nd ed.). Retrieved from https:/ /www.kictanet.or.ke/Activities/
Women-and-CyberCrime-in-KE/Kenya_Study-Women-and-Cybercrime-2nd-Edition-2013.pdf
428 Ongoma, N. & Wandia, T. (2018). Women and online violence in Kenya. Nairobi, Kenya: Ford Foundation 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
138Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7self-censorship or limiting activities on social media, such as not uploading personal pictures, 
avoiding controversial conversations, muting notifications, or abandoning social media.
The study also found that older women were less vulnerable to online attackers due to greater 
access to legal support, having a network of personal support, and an ability to report attackers. 
Also, there was the possibility of online violence moving to offline violence such as with cyber 
stalking where the perpetrator used information posted online to find the women in their physical 
locations.429 
 A 2016 Article 19430 study found that Kenyan women journalists were heavy users of various 
social media, and 75% of them had experienced online harassment in their professional work. 
Hacking, stalking and threats were reported to be the most common forms of digital harassment 
of the women journalists. 
 ▶ Indicator: Evidence of government, law enforcement and judicial action to provide 
protection to women against online gender-based harassment and violence.
A 2010 KICTANet431 report observed that Kenyan legislation and policy did not have specific 
provisions for cybercrimes such as stalking, chat room abuse, impersonation, identity theft and 
others. The report further noted that the existing legislation at the time, the Kenya Information and 
Communication (Amendment) Act432 recognized the phenomenon of cyber crime but focused on 
protecting crimes against property and information technology infrastructure rather than against 
the person. Infrastructure. Additionally, many victims of cybercrime tend to be unwilling to report 
to law enforcement authorities, which means that there is little empirical data on the type and 
extent of crime.
The 2013 KICTANet study observed that there was minimal reporting of cybercrimes against 
women “due to feelings of embarrassment, shame, and conviction that no action will be taken 
by the police or relevant authorities.” More broadly, the Cabinet Secretary in charge of Internal 
Security observed that the government was focused on harmoning its policy and legal approaches 
to global standards, a challenge magnified by the different legal frameworks that government 
cyber security around the world.433 
429 ibid
430 Article 19 (2016). Women journalists’ digital security. Nairobi, Kenya: Article 19 Eastern Africa.
431 Kictanet (2010). Women and cybercrime in Kenya: The dark side of ICTS (Working document Vol. 1). Retrieved from https:/ /
www.kictanet.or.ke/documents/Activities/Women-and-CyberCrime-in-KE/Women_and_Cybercrime_in_Kenya_Literature_
Review_report_working_ver4.pdf
432 The Kenya Information and Communication (Amendment) Act 2013 (http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/
AmendmentActs/2013/KenyaInformationandCommunications_Amendment_Act2013.pdf) 
433 Kimanzi, D. & Toroitich, E. (2019, Oct. 24). Kenya’s bid in enhancing cybersecurity in the country. The Standard. Retrieved 
from https:/ /www.standardmedia.co.ke/ 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
139 Theme A Gender 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7 ▶ Indicator: Existence of online services which are intended to protect women 
against online gender-based harassment 
The national Computer Incident Response Team (KE-CIRT) allows for the reporting of incidents or 
vulnerabilities in its website, through a telephone hotline and an email address (incidents@ke-cirt.
go.ke).434 Vulnerabilities it has identified include: identity theft, intrusion, malicious code outbreak, 
malware threat, phishing, request for forensics, spam, suspicious traffic, web defacement and 
other others. Incidents are also identified and they include: abusive content, malicious code, 
information gathering, intrusion attempts, intrusions, availability, information security, fraud, 
vulnerability, and others.435
THEME B  
Children
XB.3 How do children perceive and use the Internet?
 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions of the Internet among children derived from surveys, 
including barriers to use, value of use and fears concerning use, aggregate and 
disaggregated 
The National Council for Children’s Services defines a child as “an individual who has not 
attained the age of eighteen years or any human being under the age of eighteen years. A 
growing number of children in Kenya have access to the Internet and digital technologies436. The 
Communications Authority of Kenya has noted the various content that children access online, 
including: commercial and fan sites, entertainment sites, communication/chat sites, and games 
and interactive sites. Additionally, children are more likely to be drawn to visual content – such 
as pictures or videos – rather than text.437 The CA also notes the risks that children are exposed 
to online, including: online enticement, inappropriate content (e.g. of a sexual or violent nature), 
434 Communications Authority of Kenya (n.d.b). (The national KE-CIRT/CC: Report an incident. Retrieved from https:/ /www.ke-cirt.
go.ke/index.php/report-an-incident/)
435 Communications Authority of Kenya (n.d.c). (The national KE-CIRT/CC: Report a vulnerability. Retrieved from https:/ /www.
ke-cirt.go.ke/index.php/report-a-vulnerability/) 
436 Ndemo, B. & Munyuwiny, S. (2018). Findings from Baseline Survey on Online Child Sexual Exploitation in Mombasa, Nairobi, 
Nakuru and Kisumu Counties, Kenya. Nairobi: AICS, Terre Des Hommes, & Childline Kenya
437 Communications Authority of Kenya (2014). Children and the use of the Internet. Retrieved from https:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/Children-And-The-Use-Of-Internet.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
140Theme B  Children
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7legal and financial risks, viruses and hacks, unmoderated forums, addiction to particular content 
or behavior and unmonitored access to the children438. 
A 2018 study observed that while the Internet was useful in providing opportunities for the 
development of children, it was also an effective platform for promoting online child sexual 
exploitation (OCSE). The forms of OCSE common in Kenya are livestreaming of children 
performing sexual acts, distribution of child pornography, and online enticement of children for 
offline abuse.439
A third of the children in the 2018 study reported frequently engaging in high risk online activities, 
lured by the promise of payment or due to being persuaded by a peer or an adult. Nearly half 
– 44% - of the parents were aware of the online exchange of sexual content among children 
but only 10% said their child had reported such an incident to them440
 ▶ Indicator: Data on the use of the Internet by children, aggregate and disaggregated, 
compared with other age groups (e.g. data on location, frequency and type of use)
Different studies conducted between 2013 and 2018 have shown that students in different 
sections of the country have varying access to the Internet. A 2013 study showed that children 
between the ages of 12 to 17 accessed the Internet as follows: 42% of the respondents accessed 
the Internet twice or thrice a week; A quarter of the respondents (25%) and 24% accessed the 
Internet once a day or several times a day respectively. Nine percent accessed the Internet two 
to three times a month. The study also showed that smartphones were the gadgets most used to 
access the Internet.441 The findings are shown in the table below:
Table 14. Survey on Children aged 12-17 Use of Internet in Kenya
Access to Internet % 
Once a day 25
Several times a day 24
Two to three times a week 42
Two to three times a month 9
Total 100
438 ibid
439 Ndemo, B. & Munyuwiny, S. (2018). Findings from Baseline Survey on Online Child Sexual Exploitation in Mombasa, Nairobi, 
Nakuru and Kisumu Counties, Kenya. Nairobi: AICS, Terre Des Hommes, & Childline Kenya
440 Ndemo, B. & Munyuwiny, S. (2018). Findings from Baseline Survey on Online Child Sexual Exploitation in Mombasa, Nairobi, 
Nakuru and Kisumu Counties, Kenya. Nairobi: AICS, Terre Des Hommes, & Childline Kenya
441 Murianki C. (2016). A status on child online safety in Kenya. Communications Authority of Kenya. Retrieved from https:/ /
www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Documents/ChildOnlineSafetyInitiative_Kenya.pdf
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
141 Theme B Children 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7Children and youth were more likely to access the Internet from mobile phones - and through mobile 
phone bundles - rather than personal computers. Younger children (12-14 years) were more likely 
to share a phone with someone else while most of those aged 15-17 had their own phones.442 
A 2018 study covered children from 405 households in Mombasa, Kisumu, Nakuru, and 
Nairobi, four out of 47 counties in Kenya. The study found that 65% of the children had access 
to the Internet, with access doubling among children between 12 - 18, as compared to those 
between 6 to 11. Overall, 52% of the children gained access to the Internet on their own phones, 
while 32% used the phone of a parent or caregiver. The study also indicated that children of 
age 12 and above had a 74.5% probability of having access to the Internet.443
Most children accessed social media online – mainly Facebook and WhatsApp - while online through 
their personal or parents’ phones. However, the 2018 study showed that a worryingly high number 
of children had engaged in some form of risky activity online,444 as shown in the table below.
Table 15. Risky activities engaged in by children
Risky activity %age
Accepted/sent a friendship request with a stranger 75%
Shared message to arouse sexual feeling 36%
Viewed sex acts in chatrooms/webcams 24%
Shared nude photos online 19%
Shared video recording of own sex act  9%
Source: Ndemo and Munyuwiny, 2018
XB.4 Is there a legal and policy framework to promote and protect the 
interests of children online, and is this effectively implemented? 
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of a policy framework and legal protections consistent with 
the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), and evidence that this is implemented 
by government and other competent authorities 
Key policy areas in relation to children online include safety and education. Organizations 
involved in policy making related to children include the Department of Children’s Services. The 
442 Terre des Hommes (2018). The dark side of the Internet for children: Online child sexual exploitation in Kenya- A rapid 
assessment report. Retrieved from https:/ /www.terredeshommes.nl/sites/tdh/files/uploads/tdh-nl_ocse_in_kenya_research_
report_feb_2018.pdf
443 Ndemo, B. & Munyuwiny, S. (2018). Findings from Baseline Survey on Online Child Sexual Exploitation in Mombasa, Nairobi, 
Nakuru and Kisumu Counties, Kenya. Nairobi: AICS, Terre Des Hommes, & Childline Kenya
444 Ibid
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
142Theme B Children 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7legal framework for children’s rights include the Constitution; the Children’s Act, 2001; the Kenya 
Information and Communications (Amendment) Act, 2013; Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes 
Act, and the Sexual Offences Act, 2006.445
The government established a national child helpline in 2006 for children to report different 
forms of abuse. In a 2016 study no reference was made to digital abuses which suggests that 
offences against children were not reported, or people did not know how to report them. The 
helpline is telephone and Internet-based. The types of abuse reported included child neglect, 
sexual abuse, physical abuse, child labour, emotional abuse, and child trafficking/abduction. 
However, the increased access to and use of ICTs in Kenya has led to children using mobile 
phones and other ICTs devices to access the Internet. This has exposed them to various risks 
including online and offline sexual exploitation. For instance, a 2018 study reveals that “Kenya 
has become a source of indecent images of minors, which are circulated online by UK offenders, 
who then choose Kenya as their designation for child sex tourism”.446
The objectives of the National Children’s Services include protecting children against online 
sexual exploitation with proposed activities including the following: review information available 
on the extent of SEC in the online environment; create awareness on child online protection 
through theatre; hold regional dialogue circles with children and youth to advocate for child 
online protection and Internet governance; train cyber business owners and operators on child 
online protection; review, adopt and implement community and school-based child online 
protection awareness programmes; lobby development partners to prioritize activities on child 
online protection; develop a framework on child online protection; lobby for budgetary allocation 
from the private sector towards child online protection.
The government established a national child helpline in 2006 for children to report different forms 
of abuse. However, a Childline report447 on child protection spanning 10 years (2006 - 2016) 
states that the types of abuse reported were: child neglect, sexual abuse, physical abuse, child 
labour, emotional abuse, and child trafficking/abduction. The report made no specific reference 
to digital space, which suggests that children do not report them, do not know to report them or 
the study did not seek the information out. The helpline is telephone and Internet-based.
Moreover, children are vulnerable online to sexual exploitation given the spread of mobile phone 
penetration and Internet access.448 There are three categories that offer online risk for children: 
content, where a child may receive inappropriate content or messages; contact, where a child 
445 Watoto Watch (n.d.). Law. Retrieved from http:/ /watotowatchnetwork.org/law/
446 National Children’s Services 
447 Child Protection Report 2006 - 2016 (http:/ /www.childlinekenya.co.ke/assets/files/Child-Protection-Report-2006-2016.pdf)
448 Terre des Hommes (2018). The dark side of the Internet for children: Online child sexual exploitation in Kenya- A rapid 
assessment report. Retrieved from https:/ /www.terredeshommes.nl/sites/tdh/files/uploads/tdh-nl_ocse_in_kenya_research_
report_feb_2018.pdf 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
143 Theme B Children 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7may engage in interactions that pose a risk; and conduct, where a child may engage in risky 
behavior.
Children who are particularly at risk of online child sexual exploitation include children living 
with disabilities, those in poverty or marginalized communities, and children with mental health 
challenges. The external conditions that make Kenyan children vulnerable to sexual exploitation 
include the children’s relatively good grasp of English, easy access to the Internet and social 
media sites, and established payment systems such as M-Pesa.449 
Yet there remain barriers including areas of concern related to children online that are not clearly 
covered by policy. These areas include sexual exploitation, cyber bullying, and exposure to 
inappropriate content. The Terre des Hommes report notes that: “while Kenya has invested heavily 
in developing, implementing and expanding its digital environment, such progress does not seem 
to have been matched by increased social awareness or targeted child protection measures that 
effectively address and mitigate the risks that children face from the growing and widespread 
Internet use and mobile technology”450 Additionally, there remain challenges in arresting and 
prosecuting perpetrators of online crimes against children.
The Communications Authority of Kenya has partnered with various organizations to combat 
various types of child online crimes including cyber-bullying, solicitation of minors, identity theft, 
online fraud, child pornography and Internet addiction. In March 2019, the Child Protection 
Unit launched a cyber wing designed to combat online sexual abuse of children.451 This wing 
is designed to enable authorities to track child abuse through data from technology firms. This 
unit has been useful in enabling collaborations with local, regional and other authorities entities 
such as Interpol and social media companies to track perpetrators of online crimes against 
children and to protect children such as by pulling down harmful content. A new Children’s Bill 
of 2019 that is yet to be enacted provides updated provisions in law and is expected to better 
protect children online.
449 Terre des Hommes (2018). The dark side of the Internet for children: Online child sexual exploitation in Kenya- A rapid 
assessment report. Retrieved from https:/ /www.terredeshommes.nl/sites/tdh/files/uploads/tdh-nl_ocse_in_kenya_research_
report_feb_2018.pdf 
450 Terre des Hommes (2018). The dark side of the Internet for children: Online child sexual exploitation in Kenya- A rapid 
assessment report. Retrieved from https:/ /www.terredeshommes.nl/sites/tdh/files/uploads/tdh-nl_ocse_in_kenya_research_
report_feb_2018.pdf 
451 Kenya gets first cyber unit to fight child sex abuse https:/ /www.nation.co.ke/news/Kenya-gets-first-cyber-unit-to-fight-child-sex-
abuse/1056-5041396-trw3ca/index.html 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
144Theme B Children 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7THEME C  
Sustainable Development
XC.1 Do national and sectoral development policies and strategies for 
sustainable development effectively incorporate ICTs, broadband 
and the Internet? 
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of a recent, comprehensive policy for the development 
of ICTs, broadband and the Internet, which includes consideration of likely future 
developments in these fields 
The government has developed several policy documents related to sustainable development that 
incorporate ICTs, broadband and the Internet. Vision 2030 (and its Medium Term Plan, the Big 
4 Agenda) and the the Kenya Information and Communication Act 2013452 recognize ICT as 
an enabler of socio-economic development. Furthermore sector specific documents such as the 
National ICT Policy (2006) which has undergone revision, the National Broadband Strategy 
(2012) which has also been revised, and the National ICT Strategic Plan (2013-2017) outline 
in depth the role of ICTs in society.
Among these areas are e-commerce, which is growing in sub-Saharan Africa, disrupting business 
models, services, and products. 
The National ICT survey (2016) established that 39% of private enterprises in Kenya were 
engaged in e-commerce. A 2019 GSMA453 report indicated that in the last two years, sub-
Saharan African had emerged as among the 12 fastest growing financial technology hubs in the 
world. The report further indicated that more than 60% of adults in Kenya among other countries 
owned a mobile money account, with nearly 9 out of every 10 mobile money accounts being 
in East and West Africa. Interoperability among telecommunications firm (telcos) platforms is 
central to the growth of mobile money services, enabling the transfer of money among different 
players in the financial system, including banks and telcos. The range of payment options has 
also increased beyond credit cards to include mobile money payments.
Other than services and products such as ride-hailing applications and e-commerce platforms, 
new commercial opportunities are arising with the emergence of artificial intelligence and 
452 The Kenya Information and Communication (Amendment) Act 2013 http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/
AmendmentActs/2013/KenyaInformationandCommunications_Amendment_Act2013.pdf
453 GSMA - The mobile economy sub-Saharan Africa 2019 (https:/ /www.gsma.com/r/mobileeconomy/sub-saharan-africa/)
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
145 Theme C  Sustainable Development
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7blockchain. In 2019, Google and Microsoft launched labs in Accra and Nairobi respectively 
to promote artificial intelligence and machine learning.454
In Kenya however, there is limited legislation governing this rapidly growing area which had 
reached the KSh. 1 trillion mark in 2018.455 The indicates that there is limited data in this area, 
including which factors challenge the growth of e-commerce. The report notes that it is “extremely 
difficult to try and develop policies on promoting e-commerce growth yet basic consumer data 
does not exist e.g. should the country’s focus be on domestic e-commerce or should it be on 
international e-commerce, which could generate foreign exchange.”
Consumer purchase rights and laws have also not been enacted in Kenya, while e-commerce 
platforms are not regulated which leaves consumers vulnerable to online harm. Additionally, there 
needs to be a reduction in the instability of Internet connectivity and the cost of communicating.456
XC.7 What proportion of businesses, including small and medium sized 
businesses make use of the Internet and e-commerce? 
 ▶ Indicator: Proportion of SMEs using the Internet, by type of access 
Online commerce is a growing area in sub-Saharan Africa, disrupting business models, services, 
and products. However, there has been limited research on the adoption of e-commerce among 
small- and medium-sized enterprises in Kenya.457 The study of 35 travel and tour operators found 
100% adoption of e-commerce, and additionally, e-commerce was influenced by infrastructure, 
broadband connections, availability, reliability, telecommunication costs, and the supply chain 
established. E-commerce also opened SMEs to new markets.
Another study in 2013458 found that the majority of 163 SMEs in Nairobi had not adopted 
e-commerce nor did they have a functioning e-commerce strategy. Only 22% of the companies 
had active websites that had interactive engagement with their clients, 31% had static websites, 
while 43% did not have working websites. E-commerce was found to provide strategic value 
for the firms that had adopted it.
454 Google has opened its first Africa Artificial Intelligence lab in Ghana
 https:/ /edition.cnn.com/2019/04/14/africa/google-ai-center-accra-intl/index.html 
455 Communications Authority of Kenya (n.d.a) The development of e-commerce in Kenya.
 Retrieved from https:/ /ca.go.ke/industry/ecommerce-development/ 
456 Rotich, J. (2013, June 18). Meet BRCK, Internet access built for Africa. Retrieved from https:/ /www.youtube.com/
watch?v=qsJYrwzfd6w 
457 Wanjau, K., Macharia, R.N., & Ayodo, E.M.A. (2012). Factors Affecting Adoption of Electronic Commerce among Small 
Medium Enterprises in Kenya: Survey of Tour and Travel Firms in Nairobi. International Journal of Business, Humanities and 
Technology, 2(4), 76 – 91. 
458 Mutua, J., Oteyo, I.N., & Njeru, A.W. (2013). The Extent of E-Commerce Adoption among Small and Medium Enterprises in 
Nairobi, Kenya. International Journal of Business and Social Science, 4 (9), 1 16 – 122.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
146Theme C Sustainable Development 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7The 2016 National ICT survey459 established that overall, 39% of private enterprises in Kenya 
were engaged in e-commerce. Further, a 2019 GSMA460 report indicated that in the last two 
years, sub-Saharan African had emerged as among the 12 fastest growing financial technology 
hubs in the world. However, as the Communications Authority461 observed, there is no data to 
show what barriers slow the growth of the e-commerce sector, and why Kenyans are not fully 
engaged in online purchasing. 
 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions of the value of Internet use by SMEs 
A 2019 GSMA462 report indicated that more than 60% of adults in Kenya among other countries 
owned a mobile money account, with nearly 9 out of every 10 mobile money accounts being 
in East and West Africa. Interoperability among telecommunications firm (telcos) platforms is 
central to the growth of mobile money services, enabling the transfer of money among different 
players in the financial system, including banks and telcos. The range of payment options has 
also increased beyond credit cards to include mobile money payments. While there are no 
statistics to assess perceptions of value, the increased adoption of mobile payments for example, 
shows a growing positing perception of the value of Internet use by SMES.
THEME D  
Trust and Security
XD.1 Is there a national cybersecurity strategy, with multi stakeholder 
engagement and aligned with international human rights 
standards, including a national computer emergency response 
team (CERT) or equivalent? 
 ▶ Indicator: Existence of cybersecurity strategy, with multistakeholder involvement, 
which is consistent with international rights and norms 
459 National ICT Survey (http:/ /ca.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/National-ICT-Survey.pdf)
460 GSMA - The mobile economy sub-Saharan Africa 2019 (https:/ /www.gsma.com/r/mobileeconomy/sub-saharan-africa/)
461 Communications Authority of Kenya (n.d.a) The development of e-commerce in Kenya. Retrieved from https:/ /ca.go.ke/
industry/ecommerce-development/
462 GSMA - The mobile economy sub-Saharan Africa 2019 (https:/ /www.gsma.com/r/mobileeconomy/sub-saharan-africa/)
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
147 Theme D  Trust and Security
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7Kenya’s cybersecurity legal framework includes the Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act463 and 
the Kenya Information and Communications Act.464 The government also developed the National 
Cybersecurity Strategy 2014465 which has four strategic goals which are to: enhance the nation’s 
cybersecurity posture in a manner that facilitates the country’s growth, safety, and prosperity; 
build national capability by raising cybersecurity awareness and developing Kenya’s workforce 
to address cybersecurity needs; foster information sharing and collaboration among relevant 
stakeholders to facilitate an information sharing environment focused on achieving the Strategy’s 
goals and objectives; and, provide national leadership by defining the national cybersecurity 
vision, goals, and objectives and coordinating ybersecurity initiatives at the national level.466
Undergirding the strategy is the need to “secure the online environment for citizens, industry, 
and foreign partners; increasing the Kenyan people’s confidence in online transactions, data 
security, fraud protection, and privacy; encouraging greater foreign investment and enhancing 
trade opportunities; and enabling Kenya’s broader economic and societal goals”.
Among the action points contained in the strategy are to establish formal regional and 
multistakeholder partnerships. Partners in CIRT at national, regional and international levels 
include telecommunication companies, the ICT Authority, the Central Bank of Kenya, 
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), the Kenya Education Network (KENET), academia, the East 
African Communications Organization Cybersecurity Working Group, and the International 
Telecommunications Union.
 ▶ Indicator: Establishment of national CERT or equivalent, and evidence concerning 
its effectiveness 
The Communications Authority of Kenya is mandated by the Kenya Information and 
Communications Act to establish a Computer Incident Response Team (CIRT) that serves as its 
national cyber security management framework. The CIRT is a multi-agency partnership that 
coordinates national cyber security, and runs telephone hotlines and an email address through 
which one can report an incident. It also issues advisories on scams and other cyber threats, 
including online bullying, and fraud. The team still has challenges in carrying out its functions, 
including budgets, capacity, effectiveness and so on. 
463 The Computer Misuse and Cybercrimes Act 2018 (http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/
ComputerMisuseandCybercrimesActNo5of2018.pdf) 
464 The Kenya Information and Communication (Amendment) Act 2013 (http:/ /kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/
AmendmentActs/2013/KenyaInformationandCommunications_Amendment_Act2013.pdf) 
465 National Cybersecurity Strategy 2014 (http:/ /icta.go.ke/pdf/NATIONAL%20CYBERSECURITY%20STRATEGY.pdf)
466 National Cybersecurity Strategy 2014 (http:/ /icta.go.ke/pdf/NATIONAL%20CYBERSECURITY%20STRATEGY.pdf)
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
148Theme D Trust and Security 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7XD.4 Have there been significant breaches of cybersecurity in the 
country within the last three years? 
 ▶ Indicator: Incidence and nature of breaches reported, and numbers of individuals 
and businesses affected
In 2019 the Communications Authority of Kenya 467 indicated there had been 26.6 million 
cyber threats during the April - June 2019 quarter, a 136.4% increase from the previous quarter’s 
reported 11.3 million threats. The increase was linked to a global increase in malware including 
ransomware attacks during the quarter. Various forms of cybersecurity breaches have been 
experienced in the country, including the hacking and defacing of government websites in June 
2019,468 online bank theft,469 actual and attempted data breaches.470 
A report by cybersecurity firm Serianu shows the cost of cybercrime in Kenya in 2018 was KES 30 
billion (USD 300 million), but organizations could lose more in the coming years. Moreover, there 
was an increase in organizational spend in cybersecurity from 2017 to 2018. The report indicated 
that 26 percent of respondents said they spend above a million shillings on cybersecurity.471 
 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions of Internet security among users, businesses and other 
stakeholder groups 
The level of cybersecurity awareness in Kenya is still low with 15% of organizations not having 
an established cyber security training programs. According to Serianu, most organizations (23%) 
are also still very reactive when it comes to cyber security training, these organizations train their 
staff only when there is an incident or problem. This is worrying considering 54% of all cyber 
attacks reported in the survey was through work.472 The report also notes that Kenyan companies 
are also reluctant to develop the skill sets of their security team through frequent training and 
certifications. This is due to the fact that information security is still seen as an expense rather 
than a return on investment.473 
467 Communications Authority of Kenya (2019). Fourth quarter sector statistics report for the financial year 2018/2019 (April – June 
2019). Nairobi, Kenya: Communications Authority of Kenya.
468 Otieno, B. (2019, June 3). NYS and IFMIS among government websites hacked. Retrieved from https:/ /www.businessdailyafrica.
com/ 
469 Standard Team (2019). How big banks lost billions in one week to cyber criminals. The Standard. Retrieved from https:/ /
www.standardmedia.co.ke/
470 Privacy International (n.d.). State of privacy Kenya. Retrieved from 
 https:/ /privacyinternational.org/state-privacy/1005/state-privacy-kenya 
471 Serianu (2018) Kenya ICT report 2017: Demystifying Africa’s cyber security poverty line. Retrieved from https:/ /www.serianu.
com/downloads/KenyaCyberSecurityReport2017 .pdf
472 ibid
473 ibid
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
149 Theme D Trust and Security 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7 ▶ Indicator: Data concerning phishing, spam and bots in national level domains 
According to Serianu, weak security infrastructure led to multiple attacks of various types including 
phishing, cyber pyramid schemes. These cost Kenyans an estimated KES 2 trillion. Further, the 
hacking of government sites led to weakened service delivery and election hacking.474 In one 
quarter of 2017, Kaspersky Labs blocked 51 million attempts at setting up phishing pages.
THEME E  
Legal and Ethical Aspects of the Internet
XE.3 How do individuals perceive the benefits, risks and impact of the 
Internet within the country? 
 ▶ Indicator: Perceptions of the benefits, risks and impact of the Internet, derived 
from household or opinion surveys, disaggregated by sex 
Women generally have less access to ICTs than men and this is expected to increase as 
the technologies and services become more sophisticated and expensive, requiring greater 
levels of income and education to access and to operate. The analysis demonstrates that 
gender disparities exist for mobile phone adoption in rural areas. In urban areas, differences in 
mobile phone adoption are a consequence of the differences in income and education. Internet 
adoption, however, is affected by gender disparities in both urban and rural areas and women 
seem to be the last movers (or late adopters) of technology in this case.
XE.4 Do Internet users report experiencing significant harassment or 
abuse at the hands of other Internet users which deters them from 
making full use of the Internet? 
 ▶ Indicator: Availability of reporting mechanisms for online harassment or abuse, 
including reporting arrangements by online service providers 
474 ibid
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
150Theme E  Legal and Ethical Aspects of the Internet
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7Social media platforms have become a fertile ground for the perpetration of sexual and gender-
based violence. These forms of violence are a clear manifestation of existing discrimination that 
exists offline, which are underpinned by unequal power relations and discriminatory social norms. 
According to research done by womankind organization, United Kingdom in 2018, women 
have limited and inadequate measures and redress when they experience online violence.475
The research further suggests that women do not feel that the social media platforms have given 
victims of violence satisfactory response. With many citing that the companies or platforms do 
not understand the nature of gender abuse. This indicates that the policies put in by the platforms 
appear to be inadequate. According to Ebele Okobi, Facebook’s Head of Policy team in Africa, 
Facebook provides an extensive amount of tools for people to share The research also states 
that women from Kenya reported that the police do not have the right training to handle such 
cases and hence most of them prefer not to report this matter. 
 ▶ Indicator: Data on the extent to which Internet users report harassment or abuse, 
with particular attention to specific demographic and social groups (including women, 
ethnic and other minorities, and civil activists)
According to a study by the Association of Media Women in Kenya and Article 19 Eastern 
Africa, the Internet continues to be an enabling space for the realization of gender equality. 
However, the same space is being used to harass women through different forms of online 
violence the most common in Kenya being trolling, cyber harassment, cyberstalking, defamation, 
public shaming, identity theft, hacking amongst other offenses. The research notes that out of 
10 women journalists 7, have experienced online gender based violence. Patriarchy, unequal 
power relations, and structural gender inequality underpin violence and abuse against women 
both offline and online. 
There also exist challenges in the implementation of existing policy and legal frameworks. The 
police do not have sufficient capacity to understand the nature of online offences let alone the 
technology or requisite tools to unmask perpetrators, investigate such cases and deliver justice 
to victims of such offences. Also, the police do not keep statistics of complaints that are filed, 
making it difficult to establish trends. In addition, most of the perpetrators of online violence go 
unpunished because very few victims report the incidents. Lastly, resource constraints and a lack 
of knowledge and training of police, prosecution and judicial officers, on technology and cyber-
crimes, presented serious challenges in investigating and collecting evidence in online violence.
475 Womankind (2018). Breaking the silence: Ending online violence and abuse against women’s rights activists. Retrieved https:/ /
www.womankind.org.uk/docs/default-source/default-document-library/breaking-the-silence-policy-briefing.pdf?sfvrsn=0
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
151 Theme E Legal and Ethical Aspects of the Internet 
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
Policy Recommendations for Various 
Stakeholders
Government
• Implement the Data Protection Act 2019 to regulate and ensure good practices of data 
collection, storage, use, and dissemination. 
• Implement the two-thirds gender quota to ensure balanced gender representation in key ICT 
policy making positions.
• Prohibit violence against women.
• Reform the Children Act to ensure it addresses sexual exploitation, cyberbullying, and 
exposure to inappropriate content. 
• Support e-commerce ventures through infrastructure provision, friendly registration and 
licensing procedures, reasonable tax requirements, and access to financing. 
• Conduct digital literacy campaigns including training on e-commerce to users in both urban 
and rural areas. 
• Train and equip law enforcement officers and make them aware of cyber crimes.
• Have a clear framework for the coordination of cybersecurity efforts, provide leadership, 
share information, and engage and be accountable to citizens and other stakeholders on 
cybersecurity matters. 
Technical Community
• Ensure the regulation of software and mobile application development to enable ethical 
and legal protection of users as they provide data. 
• Develop products that promote positive and safe online spaces for all users.
Private Sector
• Have clear mechanisms on how their users can protect their data. 
• Have clear recourse mechanisms when user rights have been violated, including being able 
to get legal action in their local contexts. 
• Adopt privacy by design approach as a mandatory feature.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
152
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
7Policy recommendations for various stakeholders
• Prioritise and invest in the collection of a wide range of disaggregated data and indicators 
based on variables such as gender and the major gender equality indexes, geographical 
location (e.g. rural versus urban), etc. .
Civil Society
• Continue to play a role of being a watchdog over the government to ensure that it does 
not violate citizens’ rights online, but also that it puts in place measures to safeguard citizen 
rights online. 
Media 
• Use traditional, social and other digital media as platforms to sensitise citizens about cyber-
security and other data-related issues.
• Sensitize citizens about their digital rights and other emerging trends.
Academia
• Develop cyber-security literacy programs to be incorporated within curricula across primary, 
secondary and higher education levels.
• Research on children’s access and usage of ICT across social economic, cultural and 
geographical areas.
• Research on usage and access to ICTs across genders to guide in policy making. 
• Engage in gathering and analyzing cross-sectional and longitudinal Internet-related data 
aggregated in key areas including gender, age, geographical location, and cultural contents.
Individual users
• Make children aware of both the positive and negative aspects of the Internet, from the 
family level, the education system and the wider society and this can be done through 
literacy campaigns by the government, media and other interested parties.
• Provide clear policy measures to ensure users are responsible for criminal or bullying conduct 
against other users. 
• Learn about their rights and responsibilities concerning the data they own.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
153
Category X – Cross-cutting indicators
71541558
CONCLUSIONS 
AND KEY PRIORITY 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
BY STAKEHOLDER 
GROUPSThis assessment has found that Kenya has a robust Internet environment that is developing in line 
with international best practice. However, some shortcomings were noted in the various result 
areas under review that will require review by the various stakeholders to address the gaps that 
have been highlighted. While there is significant growth in the access and use of ICTs, there 
still exists a growing digital divide that will need to be bridged with the collaboration of all 
relevant stakeholders. 
Major Findings and Challenges 
categorized by ROAM –X indicators
CATEGORY R:  
Rights
Kenya policy, legal and institutional framework for human rights is comprehensive and adopts 
international human rights standards. The challenges include the restrictive legal provisions limiting 
human rights, and in the enforcement and implementation of policies and laws. Also, there is 
limited focus by key actors to systematically monitor the state of human rights particularly with 
respect to the digital environment. Moreover, awareness across key sectors on the UN Business 
and Human Rights principles and individual rights remains areas of concern. 
CATEGORY O:   
Openness
There are a number of factors affecting the provision of ICT services in the country. The key 
challenges include the absence of clear regulations for open standards, free and open software 
and other licensing options for new areas of technology. Further, there is limited government 
support for Internet access for persons with disability. Also, there are no policies on open markets, 
open content, open data and open government initiatives. Also, there is little awareness and 
policies for accessibility of government services online.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
156Category R: Rights
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersCategory R: RightsCATEGORY A:  
Accessibility to All
While access to the Internet has increased over the years largely there are gaps and disparities 
in connectivity and usage, affordability, equitable access, key platforms, capabilities and 
competencies and local content and language. Despite the government embracing digitization, 
many remain unable to access e-government services. Further, there is limited evidence-based 
research and few comprehensive digital literacy programmes.
CATEGORY M:  
Multi-Stakeholder participation
Whereas Kenya’s constitution embraces the concept of multistakeholderism in its principle of 
public participation, public engagement on key policy issues can be limited due to the absence 
of a law on public participation, low awareness and understanding of policy processes, and 
unwillingness of policy making bodies to proactively share information in a timely fashion to 
enable meaningful engagement. However, there are valuable engagements between stakeholders 
on national Internet governance such as at the Kenya IGF (KIGF).
CATEGORY X:  
Cross-cutting indicators
There are significant gaps in addressing challenges emerging from cross-cutting issues such as 
gender, children, sustainable development, trust and security and legal ethical aspects affect 
the Internet ecosystem. There are challenges in implementation and enforcement of laws and 
policies, and weaknesses in institutional capacities. Other challenges include in the areas 
of addressing child online safety, bridging the gender digital divide, enhancing the nation’s 
cybersecurity posture, enhancing public awareness, and growing the limited empirical research 
on the impact of cross-cutting issues.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
157 Category A: Accessibility to All
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by Stakeholders Category A: Accessibility to AllKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
Key Recommendations for Action by 
Stakeholder Groups 
Government
Category R – Rights:
• Government agencies such as the Communications Authority of Kenya should invest in 
research to provide accurate and diverse statistics on Internet use in the country. 
• The government should have a clear cultural heritage policy to fulfill Article 11 of the 
Constitution of Kenya.
• The Films and Stage Plays Act should be reviewed in order to provide oversight of the 
licensing procedures.
• The office of the Data Protection Commissioner should be established to ensure the protection 
of personal data. 
• The Kenya National Human Rights Commission should monitor and report on human rights 
violations online. 
Category O – Openness:
• Review the licensing framework to include non-commercial business models for provision of 
ICT services. These include community networks. 
• Adopt the multistakeholder model, where they consult all parties. For example, regulation 
of cryptocurrencies could benefit from research by academia, policy perspectives from civil 
society as well as experience in regulating ICTs from ICT regulators. 
• Encourage the use of free and open software in its ranks, as this promises more transfer of 
knowledge hence more holistic development. 
• Enforce directives on accessibility by ensuring that all broadcasters comply with requirements 
for making their content accessible to persons with disabilities. 
• Publish information on consumer complaints handled. 
• Regularly update and publish data for open access. This includes data on open contracting. 
• Adopt open data standards, for example publishing data in machine readable formats, 
especially for Government departments that publish data.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
158
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
• Sensitize its officers on the importance of open data and access to information, so that the 
officers stop creating barriers to these resources. 
• Pilot other methods of access to e-government services, particularly for marginalized and 
underserved persons, to cushion them from additional barriers to accessing the services. 
For example, the government could partner with educational institutions for their facilities to 
serve as e-government centers and officers in those facilities to work part-time in the centers. 
• Develop a policy that guarantees its websites have content in local languages and formats 
that are widely understood. This includes local languages as well as videos, for example 
with instructions on application for passports.
• Train officials on the process of digitizing information and the importance of this in terms of 
access to information by the citizens.
• Facilitate discussion on Kenyan perspectives on network neutrality, to assess how the issue 
applies locally. Unique Kenyan challenges such as lack of uniform Internet access and the 
frameworks that support neutrality.
• Address the lack of proper protection for, and the inadequate measures to punish intellectual 
property infringement. 
Category A – Access:
• Invest in regular evidence-based research for decision-making and avail the research data 
for public consumption. Government agencies should work with research methodologies 
that are verifiable and can be interrogated by the public.
• Carry out regular studies on accessibility to provide for time comparison, and insights for 
policy intervention. Specifically, access gap studies with aggregated statistics on gender 
and location should be carried out on a regular basis.
• Be more proactive, through incentives and regulations, to promote competition in the 
provision of Internet services; last mile connectivity and Internet Exchange Points (IXPs). The 
entry barriers to Internet-based enterprises should be lowered through tax incentives and 
construction of publicly shared infrastructure such as telecommunication masts and ducts. 
This would lead to better quality of service and affordable prices. 
• Implement and periodically evaluate policies on access to information, cybersecurity and 
universal access.
• Offer online services in both English, Swahili and in local languages to serve those who 
cannot read and communicate in both English and Swahili. For the population that can neither 
read nor write, government website content should also include videos and infographics.
• Lower taxes for mobile phones to increase affordability among the citizens.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
159
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
Category M – Multistakeholder:
• Enact public participation legislation and policy framework to guide the public participation 
process. The framework should provide for the avenues, thresholds, timelines and formats for 
citizen engagement while also ensuring access to draft bills, and reporting back structures 
and mechanisms.
• Create a Public Participation Authority to enforce public participation between agencies 
making decisions and the public and match public participation tools to objectives.
• Facilitate citizen engagement with Parliament and County Assemblies through alternative 
media, including radio and mobile phones. 
• Adopt open-source platforms to enhance internal parliamentary and County Assembly 
communication and also facilitate information sharing with the public.
• Provide access to weekly Senate, National Assembly, County Assembly plenary and 
committee proceedings by leveraging on both traditional and new media.
• Promote multistakeholder participation by having an open door policy on policy formulation 
process on Internet governance discussions at national and county levels. 
• Encourage multistakeholder participation in policy making on ICT issues. 
• Have multistakeholder delegations comprising the government, industry, technical experts 
and civil society to treaty making conferences. 
• Leverage social media for expanded public engagement.
• Encourage counties to invest in ICTs. 
• Support county governments possibly through USF to interpret policies in local dialects and 
conduct public participation. 
Category X – Cross-Cutting Issues
• Implement the Data Protection Act 2019 to regulate and ensure good practices of data 
collection, storage, use, and dissemination. 
• Implement the two-thirds gender quota to ensure balanced gender representation in key ICT 
policy making positions.
• Prohibit violence against women.
• Reform the Children Act to ensure it addresses sexual exploitation, cyberbullying, and 
exposure to inappropriate content. 
• Support e-commerce ventures through infrastructure provision, friendly registration and 
licensing procedures, reasonable tax requirements, and access to financing. 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
160
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
• Conduct digital literacy campaigns including training on e-commerce to users in both urban 
and rural areas. 
• Train and equip law enforcement officers and make them aware of cyber crimes.
• Have a clear framework for the coordination of cybersecurity efforts, provide leadership, 
share information, and engage and be accountable to citizens and other stakeholders on 
cybersecurity matters. 
• Recognize structural and policy limitations in matters Internet such as across gender, 
geographical location (rural versus urban), and socio-economic strata. 
• Embed under-represented or marginalized digital concerns and interests - in areas 
including gender, geographical location and socio-economic strata - in research as well as 
policymaking and implementation.
Private Sector and Technical Community
Category R – Rights: 
• Embrace and commit to the United Nations Business and Human Rights Principles.
• Develop policies and review their practices to ensure they are rights respecting by design. 
• Collaborate with other stakeholders including civil society to advance human rights within 
their operations. 
• Invest in research and provide statistics on the use of technology, which can be useful for 
decision-making. 
Category O – Openness:
• Collaborate more with universities in research. Public universities which are poorly funded 
but well resourced with academics are a ready resource on many issues including increasing 
access to the Internet and advancing local content. 
• Invest more in research and development. 
• Innovate and develop software and applications using open source software. 
• Participate in policy making processes to promote the use of open standards. 
Category A – Access:
• Advocate and work with other stakeholders to develop policies that promote Internet access.
• Consider providing Internet and its associated services, for organizations that provide 
critical cheaper services to communities, such as provision of water and affordable energy 
alternatives for cooking.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
161
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
Category M – Multistakeholder:
• Collaborate with industry stakeholders in engaging the government on proposed legislation 
or proposing amendments on policies and laws, and initiating policies that allow for a 
conducive business environment.
• Train other stakeholders to understand and get appraised on existing policy concerns. 
Category X – Cross-Cutting Issues:
• Ensure the regulation of software and mobile application development to enable ethical 
and legal protection of users as they provide data. 
• Develop products that promote positive and safe online spaces for all users.
• Have clear mechanisms on how their users can protect their data. 
• Have clear recourse mechanisms when user rights have been violated, including being able 
to get legal action in their local contexts. 
• Adopt privacy by design approach as a mandatory feature. 
Civil Society
Category R – Rights:
• Monitor and report on the state of digital rights in Kenya.
• Continue to hold the government and the private sector accountable for the state of human 
rights in the country, especially in the digital era. 
• Collaborate with other stakeholders to promote the realisation of human rights online. 
• Raise awareness of the public on their rights online. 
Category O – Openness:
• Rank government websites and portals for ease of use. 
• Improve the accessibility of their websites. For example, website content should as far as 
practicable be in machine readable format to accommodate those with visual and other 
disabilities. Consumer engagement mechanisms on websites should also be designed to 
be inclusive to the digitally illiterate and semi-literate as well as persons with disabilities. 
• Share more policy perspectives on the role of free and open software in the development 
of the Internet in Kenya. 
• Create awareness on consumer digital rights. 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
162
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
• Analyze the nature of complaints so as to advocate for more long-term solutions for the most 
pressing problems. For example, consumer complaints on unsolicited political messaging 
could be resolved through policy interventions such as requiring bulk SMS operators to be 
accountable for messages sent through their systems. 
Category A – Access:
• Advocate and work with other stakeholders to develop policies that promote Internet access.
• Consider providing Internet and its associated services, for organizations that provide 
critical cheaper services to communities, such as provision of water and affordable energy 
alternatives for cooking.
Category M – Multistakeholder:
• Conduct research and document data on all multistakeholder engagements to track 
participation, and monitor inclusion, diversity and stakeholder representation.
• Engage the national and county governments on ICT policy initiatives as well as find ways to 
collaborate or utilize the existing policy structures and processes to foster good governance. 
• Hold the government accountable to transparent and open multistakeholder participation 
in Internet-related policy processes.
• Advocate for balanced and inclusive stakeholder representation at national, regional and 
international Internet governance forums.
• Foster more inclusive participation on Internet governance issues from under-represented 
groups such as women, persons with disabilities and marginalized communities.
Category X – Cross-cutting Issues:
• Continue to play a role of being a watchdog over the government to ensure that it does 
not violate citizens’ rights online, but also that it puts in place measures to safeguard citizen 
rights online. 
Academia
Category R – Rights:
• Conduct more evidence-based research on the use and impact of technology on human 
rights in Kenya.
• Share the findings of critical research more widely to all relevant stakeholders, in particular 
policy makers. 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
163
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
Category O – Openness:
• Carry out research for informed decision-making on the issue of net neutrality. There is also 
need for research on the effects of zero-rated services offered by mobile network companies. 
• Make use of available open data to share insights on the society. They should also give 
feedback to the open data producers on the challenges they face while using the data. 
• Curate government content and make it available for use by the public. 
Category A – Access:
• Identify their needs and work on innovations that are tailored towards the creation of relevant 
local content that can drive demand for Internet access among the rural communities.
• Develop courses on digital literacy, for use in primary schools to the university level. 
Category M – Multistakeholder:
• Conduct evidence-based research on emerging issues that touch on multistakeholderism.
• Provide evidence-based recommendations on how multistakeholderism can be strengthened. 
• Disseminate research findings widely and on different platforms to ensure it reaches different 
stakeholders.
• Champion for multistakeholderism curriculum on development and design in learning systems.
Category X – Cross-cutting Issues:
• Develop cyber-security literacy programs to be incorporated within curricula across primary, 
secondary and higher education levels.
• Research on children’s access and usage of ICT across social economic, cultural and 
geographical areas.
• Research on usage and access to ICTs across genders to guide in policy making. 
• Engage in gathering and analyzing cross-sectional and longitudinal Internet-related data 
aggregated in key areas including gender, age, geographical location, and cultural contents.
Media and Journalists
Category R – Rights:
• Use their platforms to create awareness of the public on their rights online. 
• Monitor and report on the violations or abuses of human rights in the online context. 
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
164
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersKey Recommendations for Action by stakeholder groups
• Build their capacity and understanding of human rights, especially in an online context.
Category M – Multistakeholder:
• Report and cover more news stories on Internet governance and the multistakeholder nature 
of Internet governance. 
• Sensitize and promote awareness to citizens on Internet governance issues, in a timely 
fashion.
• Engage in national, regional and global forums to understand and build knowledge in the 
area of Internet governance.
Category X – Cross-cutting Issues:
• Use traditional, social and other digital media as platforms to sensitise citizens about cyber-
security and other data-related issues.
• Sensitize citizens about their digital rights and other emerging trends.
Individual Users
Category R – Rights:
• Increase their knowledge on their rights in the online context. 
• Monitor the practices of other stakeholders and resist abuse of their rights online and seek 
redress from the appropriate agencies whenever there is a violation. 
Category M – Multistakeholder:
• Cultivate interest, and endeavor to participate in awareness creation programs on Internet 
governance and the meaning of multistakeholderism. 
Category X – Cross-cutting Issues:
• Make children aware of both the positive and negative aspects of the Internet, from the 
family level, the education system and the wider society and this can be done through 
literacy campaigns by the government, media and other interested parties.
• Provide clear policy measures to ensure users are responsible for criminal or bullying conduct 
against other users. 
• Learn about their rights and responsibilities concerning the data they own.
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators
165
28Conclusions and Key Priority Recommendations for Actions by StakeholdersAnnex 1: List of multistakeholder Advisory Board
Annex 1:  
List of multistakeholder Advisory Board
No. Name Stakeholder Group
1. Rachel Nakitare Media
2 John Walubengo Academia
3 Barrack Otieno Technical
4 Rosemary Kimwatu Private Sector
5 Riva Jalipa Civil Society
6 Dr. Margaret Nyambura Intergovernmental
7 Kevin Kariuki Individual Net Users
8 Nzambi Kakusu Individual Net Users
9 Ali Hussein Private Sector
10 Sylvia Kang’ara Legal Researcher
11 Patrick Ochieng’ Civil Society
12 S. M. Muraya Private Sector (SMEs)
13 Beatrice Sigilai Telecommunications Engineer
166
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsAnnex 2: List of Peer Reviewers
Annex 2:  
List of Peer Reviewers
No. Name Stakeholder Group
1 Patrick Ochieng’ Civil Society
2 John Kieti Technical Community
3. Stanley Murage Private Sector
4 Bob Ochieng’ Technical Community
5 Beatrice Sigilai Technical Community
6 Thomas Kaberi Private Sector
7 Athena Morgan Civil Society 
8 David Indeje Media
9 Andrew Limo Media 
10 John Walubengo Academia/Media
11 Barrack Otieno Technical
12 Medika Medi Civil Society
13 Dr. Lucy Gichaga Academia
167
Assessing Internet Development in Kenya • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsASSESSING 
INTERNET 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
Using UNESCO’s Internet 
Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsKENYA
“The global crisis linked to the COVID-19 pandemic underlines how crucial it is for our 
societies to have access to information and to the Internet in order to strengthen our 
resilience in the face of the multiple challenges facing humanity.
The present voluntary assessment report of Internet Universality Indicators in Kenya 
contributes, along with the reports in Benin and Senegal, to paving the way for similar 
assessments in other countries, notably in Africa. Its production is owed to the excellent 
work of The Kenya ICT Action Network (KICTANet), and to the fruitful engagement of the 
Multi-stakeholder Advisory Board.
It is my hope that the insights and recommendations contained in this report will trigger 
fruitful policy discussion on possible actions to be implemented, and thus contribute 
to highlighting the relevance of the principles of Internet Universality for sustainable 
development in Kenya.”
Moez Chakchouk 
Assistant Director-General for Communication and Information, UNESCO 
 
“This report is a product of the efforts of a team of researchers, supported by a 
Multistakeholder Advisory Board (MAB), as well as a range of several stakeholders, who also 
participated in the validation meeting and contributed to the discussions on the KICTANet 
mailing list. The research team to whom we are truly grateful, worked on this report from 
September 2019, gathering and analysing data, seeking out comments from different 
stakeholders, incorporating feedback and finally, preparing the final report.   
KICTANet considers this publication yet another milestone and hopes that it shall be a useful 
contribution to the development of sound policy, legal, regulatory and technical approaches 
and responses that shall ultimately promote the development of the ICT sector in Kenya.”
Grace Githaiga and Victor Kapiyo
Lead Researchers, KICTANet
9789231 004087Communication and 
Information Sector
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organizatio n