                           CI-20/Council.32/ 9 
        Paris, 26 November  2020  
                               Original: English  
 
 
Distribution limited                           
  
 
 
 
 
Thirty -second session  
of the Intergovernmental Council of  
the International Programme  for the Development of Communication  
(IPDC)  
 
 
Decisions  
 
 
 
25-26 November 2020  
9.30  a.m. - 12.30  p.m. and 2.30 p.m. - 5.30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
  Item 8: Director -General’s Report on IPDC activities since the 31st session  
(Document CI -20/COUNCIL.32/Inf.3 and CI -20/COUNCIL.32/8)  
 
Based on the discussion on this agenda item, the Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC:  
 
• Takes note of the Director General’s succinct report on IPDC activities as well as the in -
depth results -based reports submitted to the IPDC Bureau on IPDC activities since its 
31st session;  
 
• Encourages continual engagement by the IPDC, in line with the current C/5 and the IPDC 
priorities, in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Devel opment as well 
as in the preparation and implementation of the next UNESCO Medium -term Strategy 41 
C/4(2022 -2029) and Programme and Budget 41 C/5 (2022 -2025);  
 
• Thanks the Bureau and the Secretariat for the implementation of the decisions of the 
Council at its 31st session and for the activation of the rapid response mechanism which 
provided support in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean within the context of Covid -19 
pandemic crisis;  
 
• Thanks the donors for contributing to the IPDC Programme and appreciates the 
fundraising efforts to raise awareness and to encourage providing support for the 
Programme;  
 
• Encourages the Bureau to approve projects in the balanced framework of all priorities of 
the Programme, taking into account a balanced geographical distribution of  the projects, 
and to continue reflecting on ways to improve the project preparation process, in close 
cooperation with the Secretariat, field offices and Member States;  
 
• Urges Member States to continue supporting the IPDC through non -earmarked and 
earmark ed financial contributions and through Funds -in-Trust (FIT).  
 
 
 
    Item 9: Follow -up to the recommendations on governance, procedures and 
working methods of the governing bodies of UNESCO (Document CI -
20/COUNCIL.32/2)  
 
 
The Council, having discussed this ag enda item:  
 
• Decides  to submit to the 41st session of the General Conference for approval the 
amendment of the Statutes of the IPDC as reflected in Annex 1 as subsequently amended 
at its 32nd session;  
 
• Decides  to amend the Rules of Procedure of the Intergovernmental Council o f the 
International Programme for the Development of Communication, as reflected in Annex 2, 
subject to the Statutes of the International Programme for the Development of 
Communication being amended by the General Conference at its 41st session, and decide s 
that the amendments to the Rules of Procedure shall enter into force once the amended 
Statutes are approved by the General Conference;  
 
• Recommends  that the limit of two consecutive terms would be applied with respect to the 
current members of the Council  once their term has expired.  
 
Annex 1:  
Draft amendments to the Statutes of the IPDC Programme  
  
Annex 2:  
Draft amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the IPDC Programme  
 
 
 
 
 
    Annex 1  
 
Statutes of the Intergovernmental Council of the International Programme 
for the Development of Communication (IPDC)  
 
 
 
Article 1  
 
An Intergovernmental Council (“Council”) of the International Programme for the Development 
of Communication (“IPDC”) is hereby established within the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization.  
 
Article 2  
 
1. The Council shall be com posed of 39 Member States of the United Nations Educational,  
Scientific  and Cultural  Organization,  elected  by the General  Conference, taking into account 
the need to ensure equitable geographical distribution and rotation.  
 
2. The term of office of Members  of the Council shall extend from the end of the ordinary 
session of the General Conference during which they are elected until the end of its second 
subsequent ordinary  session.  
 
3. Each retiring Member shall be replaced by a Member belonging to the same regional group.  
 
4. Members of the Council shall be immediately eligible for re -election.  No Member of the 
Council shall serve more than two consecutive terms.  
 
5. The Council may make recommendations concerning its own membership to the General  
Conference.  
 
6. The persons appointed by Member States as their representatives on the Council shall  
preferably  be specialists  in the fields  covered  by the International  Programme  for the 
Development of  Communication.  
 
Article 3  
 
The Council shall normally  meet in ordinary session once every two years.  Extraordinary  
sessions  may be convened  as specified  in the Council’s  Rules  of Procedure.  
 
Article 4  
 
1. The Council shall adopt its own Rules of  Procedure.  
 
2. Under  its Rules  of Procedure,  the Council  may establish  whatever  subsidiary  bodies it  
considers  appropriate,  provided  that the necessary  financial  resources  are available.  
 
 Article 5  
 
Within the framework of the decisions of the General Conference concerning the International  
Programme  for the Development  of Communication,  the Council  shall be responsible for:  
 
(а) Policy -making, guiding the planning and implementation of the Programme;  
   (b) Approving priorities of the Programme  in a balanced manner and ensuring alignment with 
UNESCO´s programme pri orities;  
 
(c) Reviewing and assessing achievements on the basis of  implementation and evaluation 
reports on the projects and defining the basic areas requiring increased international 
cooperation;  
 
(d) Reviewing ways and means whereby Member States might participate more effectively in 
the International Programme for the Dev elopment of Communication;  
 
(e) Providing, in its areas of specialization, its formal input to the Draft Medium -Term Strategy 
(C/4) and the draft Programme and Budget C/5 documents of UNESCO;  
 
(f) Contributing, in its areas of specialization, to the implementation  of UNESCO’s Medium -
term Strategy (C/4) and Programme and Budget (C/5);  
 
(g) Approving an appropriate system of financing for the IPDC in order to secure the necessary 
resources for the benefit of those requesting assistance from the IPDC;  
 
 
 
Article 6  
 
1. The  election of the Bureau shall take place during an extraordinary session of the 
Intergovernmental Council to be convened by the Director -General as soon as possible after 
the ordinary session of the General Conference at which the Members of the 
Intergover nmental Council are elected.  
 
2. The Council shall elect, from amongst its members, a Chairperson, six Vice -Chairpersons, 
and a Rapporteur on the basis of  equitable geographical representation and rotation; these 
shall form the Council’s Bureau.  
 
3. The Members of the Bureau who are representatives of Member States of UNESCO shall 
preferably be specialists in the fields covered by the International Program me for the 
Development of Communication. They shall remain in office until a new Bureau has been 
elected.  
 
4. The members of the Bureau are eligible for immediate re -election for a second term of 
office only.  
 
5. The Bureau shall discharge such duties as the Council may lay upon it. The Bureau  shall:  
 
a) Select and approve projects on the basis of clear and objective criteria ; 
b) Update the criteria for the approval of the projects when it deems necessary;  
c) Inform  the Council  on projects  approved  right after Bureau  meetings  have  been held ; 
d) Allocate funds for projects from the Special Account ; 
e) Follow -up on the effective implementation of Council  decisions;  
f) Prepare the organization of work of the Council session . 
 
6. Meetings of the Bureau may be convened between meetings of the Council at the request 
of a majority of the Council's Members, at the request of the Director -General of UNESCO or 
at the request of a majority of the Members of the Bureau.  
 
   Article 7  
 
1. Memb er States and Associate Members of UNESCO which are not  Members of the Council 
may send observers to all meetings of the Council and of the Bureau or its subsidiary  
bodies.  
 
2. Representatives  of the United  Nations  and other  organizations  of the United  Nations system  
supporting  the IPDC may take part, without the right to vote, in all meetings of the Council 
and of the Bureau or its subsidiary bodies.  
 
3. The Council shall lay down the conditions under which other  intergovernmental or 
international  nongover nmental organizations, public and private foundations and other 
bodies concerned may be invited to participate in its proceedings  without  the right to vote.  
The Council  shall also lay down  the conditions under which certain particularly well-
qualified persons may be consulted on matters within their competence.  
 
Article 8  
 
1. The Secretariat of the  Council shall be provided by the Director -General of UNESCO, who 
shall place at the Council’s disposal the staff and other means required for its operation.  
 
2. The Secretariat, under the authority of the Director -General, shall carry out the 
administrative work necessary for the implementation of the IPDC and for the sessions of the 
Council and the meetings of its  Bureau.  
 
Article 9  
 
1. The runnin g expenses of the Council and its subsidiary bodies shall be covered by 
appropriations  voted  for this purpose  by the General  Conference  of the United  Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural  Organization.  
 
2. Member States shall bear the expenses of the participation of their representatives in 
sessions of the Council, its Bureau and working groups with the exception of representatives 
of Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS), whose 
expenses shall be co vered by an appropriation voted for this purpose by the General 
Conference of UNESCO.  
 
3. Voluntary  contributions  to the established  IPDC  Special  Account  shall be accepted, as well 
as funds -in-trust and contributions in kind for concrete projects and activities, in accordance 
with the Financial Rules and Regulations of UNESCO.  
 
Article 10  
 
The Director -General shall submit to the Council, at each of its sessions, a report on the 
implementation of the IPDC. He/She shall report to the General Conference on the 
implementation of the IPDC.  
 
Article 11  
 
The Council shall submit reports on its activities to the General Conference of the United  
Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and Cultural  Organization  at each  of its ordinary sessions. 
7  Annex 2  
 
RULES OF PROCEDURE  
FOR THE INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNICATION (IPDC)  
 
 
Rule 1 – Membership  
 
Art. 2.1 of  the Statutes  1.1 The Council shall be composed of 39 Member States 
of the  United  Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, elected by the General Conference, taking 
into account the need to ensure equitable geographical 
distribution and appropriate rotation.  
 
Art. 2.2 of  the Statutes   1.2 The term of office  of Members  of the Council  shall 
extend  from the end of the ordinary  session  of the General  
Conference  during  which  they are elected until the end of 
its second subsequent ordinary  session.  
 
Art. 2.3 of  the Statutes  1.3 Each retiring Member  shall be replaced by a Member  
belonging  to the same regional group.  
 
Art. 2.4 of  the Statutes  1.4 Members  of the Council  shall be immediately  eligible  
for re-election for a maximum of two consecutive terms.  
 
Rule 2 – Functions  
Within the framework of the resolutions of the General 
Conference concerning the IPDC,  the Council  shall be 
responsible  for performing the functions assigned to it by 
Article 5 of its Statutes as adopted by the General  
Conference.  
 
 
Rule 3 - Sessions  
 
Art. 3 of the Statutes  3.1 The Council shall normally meet in ordinary session 
once every two years.  
 
3.2 Ordinary sessions are convened by the Director -
General in accordance with the Council's decisions.  
 
3.3 The Council shall normally meet at the Headquarters 
of UNESCO. It may meet elsewhere at the invitation of a  
8  Member State if so decided by a majority of its Members, 
after consultations with the Director -General.  
 
3.4 Extraordinary sessions may be conv ened either by 
decision of the Council itself, or at the request of the 
majority of its Members, or at the request of the Director -
General. The place and date of extraordinary sessions 
shall be determined by the Director -General, after 
consulting the Membe rs of the Bureau, unless already 
determined by the Council when deciding itself to hold an 
extraordinary session.  
 
3.5 All Member States and Associate Members shall be 
informed in good time of the date and place of the 
Council's sessions.  
 
 
Rule 4 - Representatives and observers  
Rule 5 - Provisional agenda for ordinary meetings  
 
5.1 The provisional agenda of ordinary the sessions shall be 
prepared by the Secretariat of the Council consultation with the 
Members of the  Bureau.  
 
5.2 The provisional agenda shall be communicated to the 
Members of the Council at least two months before the opening 
of each  session.  
 
5.3 The provi sional agenda shall also be communicated to Art. 7.1 of  the Statutes  4.1 Member  States  and Associate  Members  of UNESCO  
which  are not Members of the Council may send 
observers to all meetings of the Council, the Bureau or its 
subsidiary bodies.  
Art. 7.2 of  the Statutes  4.2 Representatives of the United Nations and other 
organizations of the United Nations system supporting the 
IPDC may take part, without the right to vote, in all 
meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies.  
 
Art. 7.3 of the Statutes  4.3 T he Council shall lay down the conditions under which 
other intergovernmental or international non -governmental 
organizations, public and private foundations and other 
bodies may be invited to participate in its proceedings 
without the right to vote. The Co uncil shall also lay down 
the conditions under which certain particularly well -
qualified persons might be consulted on matters within 
their competence.  
  
9  Member States and Associate Members of UNESCO which are 
not Members of the Council, as well as to the organizations of 
the United Nations system supporting the IPDC and to the other 
organizations, both intergover nmental and non -governmental, 
which have been invited, in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraphs 4.3 of Rule 4 above,  to participate,  without  the right 
to vote,  in the proceedings  of the Council.  
 
Rule 6 - Adoption of the agenda  
At the beginning of each session, the Council shall adopt the 
agenda for that session.  
 
Rule 7 - Amendments, deletions and new items  
The Council may, during a session, modify the order of items on 
the agenda or add or delete items. A two -thirds majority of the 
members present and voting shall be required for the addition 
or deletion of any item to the adopted agenda.  
 
Rule 8 – Bureau  
Art. 6 of the Statutes  8.1 The election of the Bureau shall take place during an 
extraordinary session of the Intergovernmental Council to be 
convened by the Director - General as soon as possible after 
the ordinary session of the General Conference at which the 
members of the Intergovernmental Council are elected. The 
Council shall elect, from amongst its Members a Chairperson, 
six Vice -Chairpersons and, a Rapporteur these shall form the 
Council’s Bureau. The deadline for submissions of 
candidatures to the Bureau will be seven days before elections 
at the Council meeting. The Members of the Bureau who are 
represent atives of Member States of UNESCO shall preferably 
be specialists in the fields covered by IPDC. They shall remain 
in office until a new Bureau has been elected.  
 
8.2 Members of the Bureau are eligible for re -election for a 
maximum of two consecutive terms.  
 
8.3 Meetings of the Bureau may be convened between 
meetings of the Council at the request of the majority of the 
Members of the Council or of the Bureau, or at the request of 
the Director -General of UNESCO. In such case the reasons for 
convening the meeting of the Bureau shall be stated in the 
request.  
 
Rule 9 - General powers of the Chairperson  
 
9.1 In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon him/her 
elsewhere by these Rules, the Chairperson shall have the  
10  following powers: he/she shall declare the opening and closing 
of meetings, direct the discussions, ensure observance of these 
Rules, a ccord the right to speak, put questions to the vote and 
announce decisions. He/she shall rule on points of order and, 
taking account of the provisions of these Rules, shall control the 
proceedings and the maintenance of  order.  
9.2 If  the Chairperson cease s to represent a Member of the 
Council or is so incapacitated that he/she can no longer hold 
office, one of the Vice -Chairpersons shall become Chairperson 
for the unexpired portion of the term of office. If that Vice 
Chairperson also ceases to represent a Member of the Council 
or is so incapacitated that he/she can no longer hold office, 
another Vice - Chairperson shall become Chairperson for the 
unexpired portion of the term of  office.  
 
 
Rule 10 - Functions of Vice -Chairperson  
In the absence of the Chairper son during a session, his/her 
functions shall be exercised in turn by one of the Vice -
Chairpersons.  
 
Rule 11 - Subsidiary bodies and ad hoc committees  
In order to perform the duties assigned to it by its Statutes, the 
Council may establish whatever subsidia ry bodies it deems 
necessary for the conduct of its work within the limits of the 
appropriations voted by the General Conference.  
 
Rule 12 – Secretariat  
 12.1 The Director -General of UNESCO or his/her 
representative shall participate in the work of the Council, its 
Bureau or its subsidiary bodies, without the right to vote. 
He/she may at any time submit either oral or written statements 
to the Council or to any subsidiary body on any question under  
consideration.  
 
Art. 8.1 of the Statutes  
 12.2 The Secretariat of the Council shall be provided by the 
Director -General of UNESCO, who shall place at the Council’s 
disposal the staff and other means required for its operation.  
 
Art. 8.2 of the Statutes  
 12.3 The Secretariat, under the authority of the Director -
General, shall carry out the administrative work necessary for 
the implementation of the IPDC and for the sessions of the 
Council or the meetings of its Bureau.  
 
 12.4 The Secretariat to the IPDC shall attend all meetings of  
11  the Council, its subs idiary bodies and the Bureau.  
 
 
Rule 13 - Working languages  
Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall 
be the working languages of the Council. Simultaneous 
interpretation shall be provided in these six languages. 
Documents shall be prepared only in English and French.  
 
Rule 14 - Use of other languages  
Any speaker may speak in a language other than the working 
languages in use for a particular session of the Council or a 
subsidiary body on the condition that he/she provides for the 
interpretation of his/her speech into one of the said working 
languages.  
 
Rule 15 - Working documents  
The working documents of each ordinary session of the Council 
shall, as a rule, be communicated to the Members six weeks 
before the  opening of each  session.  
 
Rule 16 – Reports  
The Council shall submit reports on its activities to the General 
Conference of UNESCO at each of its ordinary sessions.  
 
Rule 17 - Quorum  
17.1 A majority of  the Members of the Council shall constitute a  
quorum.  
17.2 At meetings of subsidiary bodies of the Council a quorum 
shall be constituted by a majority of the Members of the Council 
which are Members of the body in question.  
 
17.3 If at meetings of subsidi ary bodies, after ten minutes' 
adjournment, there is still no quorum as  defined above, the 
Chairperson may request the agreement of all Members actually 
present temporarily to waive paragraph 17.2  above.  
 
Rule 18 - Publicity of meetings  
All meetings of the  Council shall be open to the public unless 
the Council decides otherwise.  
 
Rule 19 - Right to speak  
19.1 Observers  as provided in paragraphs 4.1 and 4.2 of Rule 4   
12  of these  Rules  may,  with the authorization  of the Chairperson, 
participate in the debates of the Council or of its subsidiary  
bodies.  
 
19.2 The  observers  provided  for in subparagraph  4.3 may be 
authorized by the Chairperson, after  consulting  the Council,  to 
address  the Council or its subsidiary bodies on matters within 
their competence.  
 
 
Rule 20 - Order of speeches  
The Chairperson shall call upon speakers in the order in which 
they have expressed the desire to speak.  
 
Rule 21 - Time -limit on speeches  
The Council may limit the time to be allowed to each speaker.  
 
Rule 22 - Points of order  
During the discussion on any matter, a representative of a 
Member of the Council may at any time raise a point of order, 
which shall forthwith be decided upon by the Chairperson. Any 
Member of the Council may appeal against the ruling of the 
Chairperson. It shall be put to the vote immediately and  the 
Chairperson’s ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority 
of Members present and voting. A representative may not, in 
raising a  point  of order,  speak  on the substance  off the matter  
under  discussion.  
 
Rule 23 - Suspension, adjournment, closure  
Any Member of the Council may, at any time, propose  the 
suspension  or adjournment  of a meeting  or the adjournment or  
closure  of a debate.  Such  a motion  shall be put to the vote 
immediately and decided by a majority of the Members present 
and voting. The following motions shall have priority,  in the order  
indicated  below,  over all other  proposals  or motions:  
(a) suspension of the  meeting  
(b) adjournment of the  meeting;  
(c) adjournment of the debate on the item under 
discussion;   
(d) closure of the debate on the item under 
discussion.  
 
Rule 24 - Voting rights  
Each Member of the Council shall have one vote.  
  
13  Rule 25 – Voting  
25.1 Decisions  shall be taken  by a majority  of the Members  
present  and voting, except in the cases provided for in Rules 7, 
30 and  31. 
25.2 In the deliberations of the Council, priority should be given 
to seeking  consensus.  
25.3 For the purpose of these Rules, the  'Members present and 
voting' means Members casting an affirmative or negative vote. 
Members who abstain from voting are considered as not  voting.  
 
Rule 26 - Show of hands and roll -call 
Voting shall normally be by show of hands. However, any 
Member may, before the voting starts, request a ro ll-call. The 
vote or abstention of each Member participating in a roll -call 
shall be recorded in the report.  
 
Rule 27 - Voting on amendments  
27.1 In order to facilitate decision -making, Council Members 
should circulate amendments to draft decisions at leas t 48 hours 
before they are discussed in the session.  
 
27.2 When an amendment to a proposal is moved, the 
amendment shall be voted on  first. 
27.3 When  two or more  amendments  to a proposal  are moved,  the 
Council  shall first  vote on the amendment  deemed  by the 
Chairperson to be  furthest removed from the original proposal 
and then on the amendment next furthest there from and so forth, 
until all amendments have been put to the vote. If one or more 
amendments are adopted, the amended proposal shall then be 
voted on. If no amendment is adopted, the proposal shall be put 
to the vote on its original  form.  
27.4 A motion is considered an amendment to a proposal if it 
adds to, deletes from or revises part of that proposal.  
 
Rule 28 - Secret ballot  
All elections shall be decided by secret ballot unless all Members 
of the Council agree otherwise.  
 
Rule 29 - Equally divided votes  
If a vote is equally divided, the proposal shall be regarded as 
rejected.  
 
Rule 30 – Amendment  
These Rules of Procedure except w hen they reproduce provisions 
of the Council Statutes may be amended by a decision of the  
14  Council taken by a two -thirds majority of the Members present and 
voting, provided that the proposal for amendment has been placed 
on the agenda.  
 
Rule 31 – Suspensio n 
Any provision of these Rules, with the exception of ones which 
reproduces a clause of the, may be suspended by a two -thirds 
majority of the Members present and voting.  
 
 
   
15  Item 10: Realignment of Financial Regulations (Document CI -20/ COUNCIL.32/3)  
 
The Council, having discussed this document, may wish:  
 
• To approve the proposed updated Financial Regulations of IPDC Special Account.  
• To request the Director -General to submit at the 211th session of the Executive Board the 
updated Financial Regulations for the Executive Board to take note of them.  
 
 
   
16  Item 11: Director -General’s Report on the Safety of Journalists and the Danger of 
Impunity (Documents CI -20/ COUNCIL.32/4 and CI -20/ COUNCIL.32/4.1)  
 
The Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC,  
 
PP 1. Welc oming the seventh biennial Director -General’s Report on the Safety of Journalists 
and the Danger of Impunity,  
 
PP 2. Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Articles 19 and 29, and International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Article  19,  
 
PP 3. Also recalling that since the Decision on safety of journalists adopted by the lPDC Council 
at its 31st session (2018), there have been the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 
A/RES/74/157 (2019); the Human Rights Council Resolutions A/ HRC/RES/44/12 (2020) and 
A/HRC/RES/45/18 (2020) as well as UNESCO Executive Board Decision (206 EX/ 5.I.B (2019) 
on the safety of journalists, media workers and social media producers who are engaged in 
journalistic activities,  
 
PP 4. Underlining UNESCO’s role in leading the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the 
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, which inter alia encourages the development of 
global, regional and national processes and mechanisms involving a ll stakeholders to achieve 
an environment for the safe exercise of free expression,  
 
PP 5. Acknowledging that the Director -General’s Report on the Safety of Journalists has been 
recognized by the UN Statistical Commission as a contribution towards Sustain able 
Development Goal (SDG) 16, Target 10, as one of the resources for monitoring the safety of 
journalists and the danger of impunity.  
 
PP 6. Noting the importance that Voluntary National Reports (VNRs) on SDG 16 include analysis 
based on indicator 16.10 .1 (Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, enforced 
disappearance, arbitrary detention and torture of journalists, associated media personnel, trade 
unionists and human rights advocates in the previous 12 months), among the other agreed 
indicator s,  
 
PP 7. Welcoming IPDC’s action to support projects aiming at strengthening capacity at national 
levels to monitor and report on the safety of journalists, empowering local actors to use SDG 
indicator 16.10.1 to measure progress towards SDG 16, as well as, IPDC’s support, s ince 2009, 
to 128 local projects implemented by local organizations via IPDC’s annual project cycle aiming, 
to promote the safety of media professionals,  
 
PP 8. Deeply disturbed by the high level of killings, albeit with a lower rate of increase in 2019, 
and profoundly concerned with the wide -ranging threats faced by journalists in the exercise of 
their profession, both online and offline, including recent increases in attacks against journalists 
covering protests as recorded in the UNESCO World Trends Rep ort on this subject published in 
September 2020, increasing online harassment of journalists in particular targeting women 
journalists, and disproportionate restrictions on journalists within the context of the ongoing 
COVID -19 crisis as free, independent and pluralistic media play an indispensable role in 
informing the public and in affording access to reliable and verified information, including 
measures to curb the spread of the virus,  
 
PP 9. Concerned by the increase in the number of journalists killed  outside of armed conflict 
zones in the last few years, many of whom were working on issues related to corruption, 
trafficking, human rights violations, environmental issues and political wrongdoing, while noting 
that journalists continue to face great ris ks in armed conflict zones,  
  
17  PP 10. Welcoming the increase in this year’s reaction rate of Member States to the Director -
General’s request for information on the judicial follow -up to killings of journalists, while 
remaining deeply concerned about the con tinued high rate of impunity for perpetrators, as 
reflected in the Director -General’s Report, and the chilling effect it may have on freedom of 
expression as well as reducing public confidence in the rule of law,  
 
PP 11. Also welcoming the information pro vided by Member States on positive measures taken 
to address the safety of journalists and impunity, including on action taken to monitor and tackle 
gender -specific risks, as a follow -up to the IPDC Council’s 2018 Decision on the Safety of 
Journalists,  
 
PP 12. Appreciating the important contribution of the Groups of Friends on the Safety of 
Journalists at UNESCO, the UN in New York and Geneva, at the OSCE in Vienna in the 
promotion of safety of journalists and the danger of impunity, welcoming the recent 
establishment of a Group of Friends on the Safety of Journalists at the Council of Europe in 
Strasbourg and encouraging that similar groups be created in other relevant intergovernmental 
organizations,  
 
PP 13. Welcoming the focus on “Combatting violence ag ainst women journalists” of the 2020 
annual report by the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women to the UN Human 
Rights Council and UNESCO’s contribution to this report,  
 
PP 14. Also welcoming UNESCO’s efforts in fostering cooperation with region al human rights 
courts and prosecution services aiming to enhance freedom of expression and safety of 
journalists,  
 
PP 15. Emphasizing the continued relevance of the decisions on the Safety of Journalists and 
the Issue of Impunity adopted in the previous sessions of the Intergovernmental Council of the 
IPDC, which urge Member States to continue “to inform the Director -General of UNESCO, on a 
voluntary basis, on the status of the judicial inquiries conducted on each of the killings 
condemned by the Director -General”:  
 
1. Appreciates the efforts of the Member States that have provided information to the Director - 
General on the status of the judicial investigations of killings of journalists; and strongly 
encourages Member States that have not yet replied to th e Director -General’s requests to 
provide such information to UNESCO, on a voluntary basis;  
 
2. Strongly urges Member States on a voluntary basis to authorize UNESCO to make the 
information on judicial follow -up publicly available on the dedicated UNESCO webp age, for 
the purposes of transparency, in line with previous Decisions on the Safety of Journalists 
and the Issue of Impunity adopted by the Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC;  
 
3. Requests the Director -General of UNESCO to continue to provide to the Inte rgovernmental 
Council of the IPDC an analytical report on the killing of journalists, media workers and social 
media producers who are engaged in journalistic activities based on the Director -General’s 
condemnations, including information on the judicial i nquiries which is based on the 
information provided by Member States on a voluntary basis;  
 
4. Taking into account the latest developments in the Director -General's analytical report, 
including the information provided on actions taken by States to promote the safety of 
journalists, the focus on gender -specific risks, and the reinforced synergies wi th the 
methodology of the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and the overall reporting on SDG 
16.10.1, invites the Director -General to officially inform relevant counterparts of the 
publication of this report, notably OHCHR, ECOSOC, UN Women, the UN and regio nal 
mandates on Freedom of Expression, and the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against  
18  Women;  
 
5. Encourages UNESCO to continue to support Member States in their monitoring and 
reporting mechanisms on journalists’ safety and the issue of impunity, in both non-conflict 
and conflict situations, and to promote a gender -sensitive approach throughout;  
 
6. Reiterates its call to Member States who have not done so, to appoint a focal point on the 
issue of safety of journalists and impunity with the remit to coordina te the monitoring of the 
safety of journalists as part of Member States’ fulfillment of SDG 16, Target 10, and to report 
nationally and internationally through the appropriate channels and in collaboration with 
relevant national authorities;  
 
7. Encourages M ember States to enhance the capacity of national judicial training institutes, 
prosecution services and law enforcement agencies and to consider the use of UNESCO’s 
existing knowledge resources in addressing impunity and the safety of journalists, especial ly 
addressing the security of journalists covering protests, in line with international standards 
on freedom of expression;  
 
8. Invites the Bureau of the intergovernmental Council of the IPDC to continue supporting 
projects that further the objectives of the  UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and 
the Issue of Impunity, in line with the global priorities gender equality and Africa,  and in 
accordance with resolution 40 C/52  as adopted by the General Conference;  
 
9. Urges the Director -General and Memb er States to increase their efforts in mobilizing 
additional extra -budgetary funding for UNESCO’s work in the area of the safety of journalists 
and the issue of impunity.    
19  Item 12: First Global Report on the implementation of Access to Information Laws, 
based on the Monitoring and Reporting of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 
indicator 16.10.2 (Document CI-20/COUNCIL.32/5)   
 
The Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC:  
 
Recalling  the relevance of the Decision on Monitoring SDG indicator 16.10.2 (access to 
information) adopted by the 31st session of the Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC which 
encourages the Secretariat “to develop a mechanism that could involve and support UNES CO 
Member States in data -collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access to 
information”;  
 
Welcoming  the 2020 UNESCO Report on the Monitoring and Reporting of SDG indicator 16.10.2 
(Access to Information), and recognizing its synergies with th e International Day for Universal 
Access to Information and its utility in providing evidence -based analysis for the improvement of 
access to information as a factor for sustainable development;  
 
Thanking  those Member States that provided information on t heir national progress on access 
to information through responding to UNESCO´s 2020 Survey on SDG indicator 16.10.2, noting  
the positive developments reported therein; and encouraging  additional measures to address 
identified gaps;  
 
Acknowledging  that the  data generated by UNESCO, as custodian agency of Indicator 16.10.2, 
has led to the upgrading of the indicator from Tier II to Tier I status indicator, and encouraging 
continued annual contributions to the global monitoring by the UN Secretary General.  
 
Appreciating  those Voluntary National Reports (VNRs) which have included analysis based on 
Indicator 16.10.2, among other data for assessing progress;  
  
Welcoming  the IPDC Bureau’s decisions to support projects aiming at strengthening capacity at 
national levels to monitor and report on SDG indicator 16.10.2 as part of measuring progress 
towards SDG 16, therefore:   
 
1. Encourages  Member States to enhance legal regulatory frameworks on access to information 
at the national level as well as the effective imp lementation of these frameworks, as part of their 
commitments to advance the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda;  
  
2. Further encourages  Member States to continue monitoring and reporting progress on SDG 
indicator 16.10.2 through forthcoming Voluntary Na tional Reviews and through responding to 
UNESCO’s annual survey, and to engage - where applicable - the oversight bodies responsible 
for access to information in the collection of data;  
  
3. Invites  the IPDC Bureau to continue supporting grass -roots proje cts that will help Member 
States in data -collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access to information, 
including strengthening monitoring and reporting capacities of oversight bodies responsible for 
access to information;  
  
4. Requests  the IPDC Secretariat:  
  
a. to further strengthen collaboration with other UN agencies, civil society 
organizations, networks of oversight bodies responsible for access to information, 
intergovernmental bodies, and other concerned stakeholders in advocacy, capacit y 
building and awareness raising efforts on Indicator 16.10.2;   
 
b. to continue publishing a biennial report on worldwide progress towards SDG  
20  indicator 16.10.2, with a view to giving visibility to national efforts to monitor and 
report on access to informat ion, to contributing data to the International Day for 
Universal Access to Information, and to further sensitizing relevant  stakeholders 
on  the crosscutting significance of access  to information in achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals;  
 
c. to repor t to the IPDC Bureau in 2021 and to the Council in 2022 about the progress 
made on the above.  
 
   
21  Item 13: Journalism Education: Paris Declaration on Freedom of Journalism 
Education (CI-20/COUNCIL.32/6)  
 
The Council, having discussed this document:  
 
1. Takes note with interest  the Paris Declaration on Freedom of Journalism Education, 
adopted by the World Journalism Education Council in July 2019;  
 
2. Acknowledges  the contribution of the IPDC to journalism education and training through 
supporting cutting -edge curricula and training materials in multiple languages, training of 
trainers (especially in Africa), and professional networking internationally;  
 
3. Welcome s the efforts made by the Bureau to support IPDC grassroots training 
initiatives/journalism education projects proposals submitted on an annual basis to the 
IPDC by developing countries, particularly least developed countries (LDCs) and invites  
the Bureau to continue supporting projects under this output area in line with the IPDC’s 
Results Assessment Framework (RAF);  
 
4. Based on the strong record of work to date, requests  the Secretariat to seek increased 
partnerships and funding for journalism education,  particularly, when possible, for:  
 
a. conducting consultations with all relevant stakeholders on current challenges of 
journalism education and prospects for fund mobilization,  
b. training trainers in order to amplify the use of UNESCO and other training mate rials 
as appropriate, which enable improved reporting on key subjects, and in line with 
IPDC priorities,  
c. developing new training materials for journalism students and practitioners on key 
emerging issues, including aspects of quality, ethics and professio nalism,  
d. continuing to support professional networking and exchange of best practices 
among journalism educators through networks such as ORBICOM, IAMCR and the 
World Journalism Congress.  
 
 
   
22  Item 14: Visibility and fundraising for IPDC: voluntary reports b y Council 
members on efforts to raise visibility and funds for IPDC at national level 
(Document CI -20/COUNCIL.32/7)  
 
 
Based on the discussion on visibility and fundraising for IPDC, the Council:  
  
• Supports  the development and implementation of fundraising actions for the benefit of 
IPDC’s special account in collaboration with BSP and in accordance with UNESCO’s overall 
resource mobilization strategy.  
 
• Requests  the IPDC Secretariat, with the support of the Chair and interested Bureau/Council 
members, to appr oach potential private donors, foundations and companies that may have 
an interest in funding media development, in order to present IPDC’s resource mobilization 
objectives and expected results;  
 
• Requests  the Secretariat to improve the IPDC website to make it more user -friendly;  
 
• Requests  the IPDC Secretariat to strengthen synergies between the IPDC, the Multi -Donor 
Programme on Freedom of Expression and Safety of Journalists, the Global Media Defence 
Fund , and other extrabudgetary modalities existing at UNESCO, and to report regularly on 
their synergies to the IPDC Council;  
 
• Requests  the IPDC Secretariat to report on the above at the 33rd meeting of the IPDC 
Council in 2022.  
 
 