Accessible Digital 
Documentary Heritage
Guidelines for the preparation 
of documentary heritage in 
accessible formats for persons  
with disabilitiesUnited Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural OrganizationFrom Exclusion to  
Empowerment  Published in 2020  
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)  
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP , France
© UNESCO 2020
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en ). 
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit 
the Organization.
Cover photos:
Kanjur written with 9 precious stones. © National Library of Mongolia 
The work of Fray Bernardino de Sahagún (1499-1590). © Real Biblioteca de Madrid.The Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s historic March 7th speech © Bangladesh Betar, Bangladesh Film Archive, Liberation War Museum.Background image: Shutterstock.
Cover design: UNESCO
Illustrations: UNESCOTypeset: UNESCO
Printed by UNESCO
Printed in France
CI/UAI/2020/PI/1Accessible Digital 
Documentary Heritage
A set of Guidelines for the 
preparation of documentary  
heritage in accessible formats  
for persons with disabilitiesTable of contents
Acknowledgments   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Executive summary   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1 . Background and research  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
A.  Introduction .............................................. 2
B.  Target groups of publication  ................................. 2
C.  Assistive technologies ...................................... 3
D.  International accessibility conventions and recommendations  ...... 3
E.  Current accessible digital heritage platforms  .................... 4
2 .  Analysis of a digital documentary heritage platform  
(UNESCO Memory of the World Register)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
A.  Accessibility of the Memory of the World website ................ 8
i. Navigation ........................................... 9
ii. Colour and contrast  ................................... 9
iii. Links  ............................................... 9
iv. Images  ............................................ 10
v. Forms  ............................................. 10
B.  Accessibility of the Memory of the World website content ......... 11
i. Nomination forms in PDF format  ........................ 11
ii. Register entries ...................................... 11
C.  Summary of analysis  ..................................... 13
3 . Guidelines for accessible digitized heritage documents  . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
A.  Basic guidelines  ......................................... 16
B.  Advanced guidelines ...................................... 17
References   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21vi •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
Acknowledgments
Authors: 
Prof. Dr. Alireza Darvishy
Juliet Manning MSc
Contributor: 
Jan Bos, Chairperson, Register Sub-Committee (RSC), International Advisory Committee (IAC), Memory of 
the World Programme
UNESCO project management, review and editing:
• Irmgarda Kasinskaite-Buddeberg, Advisor for Communication and Information, Universal Access to 
Information Section, Communication and Information Sector 
• Fackson Banda, Documentary Heritage Unit (Memory of the World Programme), Communication and 
Information Sector
• Bernards Alens Zako, Programme Specialist, Culture Sector (peer review)
UNESCO also acknowledges the advice and comments by the following people:
• Linda Young, Dr., Senior Lecturer in Cultural Heritage & Museum Studies, Deakin University, Melbourne
• Achim H. Hölter, Professor Dr., M.A., Chair of Comparative Literature, University of Vienna (Universität 
Wien) and Member of the Executive Council of International Comparative Literature Association
• Carlos Roberto F. Brandão, Professor Dr.; President of the Brazilian Institute of Museums (Instituto 
Brasileiro de Museus; IBRAM), Ministério da Cultura, Brasilia; IBERMUSEUS; Museu de Zoologia da 
Universidade de São Paulo  
• Papa Momar Diop, Associated Professor, Gaston Berger University of Saint-Louis and Université 
Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar.Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • vii
Foreword
In the 2030 Agenda, UN Member States pledged to ensure “no one will be left behind” and to “endeavour 
to reach the furthest behind first”. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) have further placed great 
emphasis on persons with disabilities, with ‘disability’ being mentioned dozens of times on issues relative to 
data collection, education, accessibility, work, justice, inequalities, and more. This speaks volumes about the 
importance of physical and digital inclusion for persons with disabilities.
As acknowledged by Target 16.10 of SDG 16, ensuring public access to information is a critical aspect of 
sustainable development.
The focus of this publication is on the right to access to documentary heritage by persons with disabilities. 
In addressing this issue, the publication takes on a key feature of the 2016 Recommendation Concerning 
the Preservation of, and Access to, Documentary Heritage Including in Digital Form. This is promoting 
and facilitating maximum inclusive access to, and use of, documentary heritage by empowering memory 
institutions to provide, among other things, equitable person-to-person access services to original documents.
The advent of digital cultural archives and collections has spurred significant advancement in global access 
to culture, including through digitization. This has profoundly enhanced our cultural experience, not only in 
terms of production, dissemination and new technology-based access, but also in terms of participation 
and creation, as well as learning and participating in knowledge societies. As the UN agency that fosters 
the creation of knowledge societies that are inclusive, pluralistic, equitable, open and participatory for all, 
UNESCO believes that the advantages of digitization should be enjoyed equally by persons with disabilities.
That is why this publication, researched and authored by someone living with a disability, is such a significant 
contribution to the existing body of knowledge on how persons with disabilities, governments and other 
stakeholders can access and experience documentary heritage as a key feature of sustainable development.
Xing Qu, 
Deputy Director-General  
Assistant Director-General for Communication and Information a.i.viii •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
Executive summary
This publication recognizes the importance of digitization of culture for persons with disabilities within the 
fulfillment of their right to universal access to cultural and linguistic heritage. Going beyond providing a general 
understanding of the barriers faced by persons with disabilities in getting access to digitized documentary 
heritage, the publication offers a set of guidelines to ensure that digitized heritage documents are accessible 
to persons of all abilities.
The guidelines help parties involved in the digitization of heritage documents, such as librarians, archivists, 
museums workers, curators, conservators and concerned stakeholders in carefully planning digital platforms 
and contents with a view to incorporating disability and accessibility aspects. By following certain standards 
for accessibility and incorporating assistive software and hardware tools into the development phase, digital 
documentary heritage repositories will allow those with vision, hearing, motor, or cognitive impairments to 
access and participate in culture. 
The guidelines have been structured in such a way that makes it easy for different types of stakeholder 
to navigate and assess various aspects to which they must commit to. For this purpose, two types of 
guidelines are proposed: a) basic guidelines – intended for stakeholders who commission documentary 
cultural heritage platforms; and b) advanced guidelines – prepared for content creators of these platforms.
This resource reiterates the commitment of the Communication and Information Sector at UNESCO to 
support Member States in ensuring universal access to cultural and linguistic heritage without leaving anyone 
behind, strengthening the foundations for global Knowledge Societies that pave the way for Sustainable 
Development Goals.Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 1
1. 
Background  
and research
This chapter provides a background of access to cultural heritage, 
covering key terms, advantages and challenges in digital cultural heritage 
for persons with disabilities. The important role of “assistive technologies” 
in digital accessibility is highlighted in this chapter, along with a number 
of international conventions and standards that secure the right of all 
persons to access cultural heritage on an equal basis. One of the standards 
introduced in this chapter is Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG) 2.1, which promotes accessible web content. Some examples of 
accessible digital heritage platforms are also presented in this chapter as 
good practices in accessibility by online museums, galleries, archives and 
libraries.
© National Library of Mongolia
Kanjur written with 9 precious stones. Inscribed in UNESCO  
Memory of the World Register by Mongolia in 2013.2 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
A.  Introduction
The importance of universal access to cultural and linguistic heritage cannot be understated. It is a right 
guaranteed by the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and has been underscored by numerous 
normative and legal instruments in the decades since. Nevertheless, many people continue to face significant 
barriers to accessing and participating in culture.
Access to cultural heritage is complex and multifaceted issue, one which depends on the diverse needs and 
interests of individuals and communities. The term “access” is often used to refer to affordability, location, 
and general ease of finding and interacting with cultural heritage. However, this type of “access” should not 
be conflated with “accessibility” for persons with disabilities – a population which remains frequently left out 
of the conversation. And this population is vast: according to the United Nations, persons with disabilities 
(PWDs) form the world’s largest minority. It is estimated that more than 15 percent of the global population 
– are living with a disability (World Bank & WHO, 2011). 
The recent emergence of digital cultural archives and collections – especially online collections – has already 
brought about a huge leap forward in terms of global access to culture. Many museums, libraries, and 
research archives have already made some or all of their collections available online in digital format. In most 
cases, they offer free or low-cost access to visitors, and their digital collections can be accessed at any time, 
from anywhere – all the user needs is an internet connection and a computer, tablet or smartphone. This 
carries inherent benefits for many persons with disabilities, especially for users with mobility disabilities, who 
may have difficulty travelling to a cultural institution or who may encounter physical barriers there (although 
it is important to note that digitized collections should not be seen as solutions in themselves here – cultural 
institutions should always take physical accessibility into mind when designing their spaces).
Despite these advantages, however, digital content remains frequently inaccessible to persons with disabilities 
– particularly to those with vision, hearing, motor, or cognitive impairments. For example, a user with a vision 
impairment may not have access to an image on a website, while a user with a hearing impairment may miss 
out on spoken narration in a video clip. A person with a cognitive impairment may have difficulty navigating 
through overly complex website menus or layouts. 
This inaccessibility extends to a great deal of digital cultural heritage. Most cultural institutions – with very 
few exceptions – do not directly consider accessibility issues when creating digitized content. Digital 
collections tend to be heavily image-based, and often lack appropriate textual alternatives for users with 
vision disabilities. Audio and video material is frequently presented without captions or written transcripts 
for users with hearing impairments. And websites are often complex and cumbersome to navigate, making 
them inaccessible for users with cognitive or learning disabilities, as well as for anyone who has difficulty 
using a mouse or a touchscreen. 
The purpose of this publication is to provide information and a set of guidelines for improving the accessibility 
of digitized documentary heritage for persons of all abilities. The information provided here is by no means 
exhaustive; rather, its intent is to provide a basic foundation for persons with little prior experience in the area 
of digital accessibility. 
B.  Target groups of publication
The target groups as relates to these guidelines include librarians, archivists, museums workers, curators, 
conservators, IT specialists involved in the digitization of documents, relevant professional bodies such 
as associations working with persons with disabilities, and other stakeholders interested in disability and 
accessibility aspects.Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 3
C.  Assistive technologies
The WHO defines assistive technologies as technologies whose purpose is ‘to maintain or improve an 
individual’s functioning and independence to facilitate participation and to enhance overall well-being. They 
can also help prevent impairments and secondary health conditions.” This can include everything from 
wheelchairs to specialized software or custom electronic devices.
There are many  assistive software  and hardware tools available to help someone with a disability to 
successfully interact with digital devices and content. These tools may assist the user with either input or 
output functions, or both. 
An example of an assistive input device is the “sip-and-puff” switch, a tool which enables users with motor 
impairments to input commands to a computer with small puffs or sips of air from their mouths, eliminating 
the need for a traditional keyboard or mouse. Assistive input tools such as this can help a user interact with 
digital devices more easily. However, it should be noted that poor digital design can make those assistive 
tools less effective and hinder the user’s ability to interact with digital content. As such, accessibility should 
be kept in mind when designing user interfaces and platforms. This aspect is discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 3 below.
Assistive technologies for output likewise play a crucial role in digital accessibility, as many users rely on 
assistive technologies to consume digital content. A classic example of an assistive output device is a screen 
reader, which is software that reads the textual content of a document or webpage aloud, and which is 
frequently used by blind persons and persons with low vision.
Ensuring the accessibility of any digitized heritage collection requires that both the platform and its content 
are compatible with commonly used assistive technologies. In some cases, this might require special 
intervention, and in others, it is simply a matter of accessibility-conscious design – such as a webpage with 
a simple, straightforward layout. The guidelines defined in Chapter 3 will consider assistive technologies for 
both input and output as they relate to the accessibility of digital heritage content.
D.  International accessibility conventions and 
recommendations
The right of all persons to access cultural heritage on an equal basis is secured by a number of international 
conventions and standards. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that “everyone has the 
right to freely participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific 
advancement and its benefits” (Article 27.1), while the States Parties to the International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recognize everyone’s right to participate in cultural life (Article 15). 
In 1960, UNESCO published and adopted a recommendation for the “Most Effective Means of Rendering 
Museums Accessible to Everyone”, affirming the ability of such cultural institutions in contributing to 
intercultural dialogue and enhancing human rights. In 1992 UNESCO established the Memory of the World 
Programme to increase awareness and protection of the world’s documentary heritage, and to provide for 
its universal and permanent accessibility. The 2006 UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CRPD) directly addresses accessibility of culture, information, education and technology. Specifically, Article 
30 provides that States Parties “must take all appropriate measures to ensure that persons with disabilities: 
a) enjoy access to cultural materials in accessible formats;
b) enjoy access to television programmes, films, theater and other cultural activities, in accessible 
formats;
c) enjoy access to places for cultural performances or services, such as theaters, museums, cinemas, 
libraries and tourism services, and, as far as possible, enjoy access to monuments and sites of 
national cultural importance.”4 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
Standards and guidelines have also been created for accessibility of websites, documents, and other 
digital media. The most universally recognized and widely used guidelines are the WCAG 2.1 (Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines). Published by the World Wide Web Consortium in 2008, the WCAG have gone 
on to become an ISO/IEC standard (called “ISO/IEC 40500:2012”). They are open-access and have been 
officially translated into 22 languages, along with several unofficial translations in other languages. Prior to 
the development of the WCAG, there were a number of different sets of web guidelines used by various 
countries and institutions. In recent years, however, most individual guidelines have been set aside in favour 
of WCAG 2.1. Many national governments have adopted WCAG into their web accessibility standards. In 
some cases, the WCAG have even been written into the law: The United States of America, for example, 
recently updated its Section 508 – a law enacted in 1998 to enforce accessibility in ICT procurement – to 
align with the WCAG guidelines. The European Standard on Accessibility also draws on the WCAG in its ICT 
procurement requirements.
The aim of the WCAG is to promote accessible web content. This has significant implications for persons 
with disabilities, as websites have been ranked among the most important ICT platforms for fostering 
inclusion (see Table 1). There is also reason to believe that adopting such guidelines is beneficial to everyone: 
“empirical evidence shows that the adoption of these guidelines improves user experience and accessibility 
for all persons, regardless of disability. This fact – that investments in accessibility also introduce benefits for 
wider groups of the population – is a common and hugely significant finding” (UNESCO et al., 2013).
Other guidelines and standards exist for a variety of different technologies, such as the “Guidelines for 
Accessible Information” created by ICT4IAL, which cover many forms of digital media, including video, 
audio, text, and images. 
E.  Current accessible digital heritage platforms
Although most major public heritage archives and collections already offer some or all of their collections 
digitally, there is still a lot more to be done to make documentary heritage more accessible to persons with 
disabilities. In August 2019, a large study by WebAIM analysing the top 100,000 websites on the Internet 
found that 98% of websites failed to conform to WCAG 2.0 standards (WebAIM, 2019). 
To ensure access to digital documentary cultural heritage, more emphasis must be placed on accessibility 
by online museums, galleries, archives and libraries. In this regard, there are a number of examples 
demonstrating good practices. 
Some libraries offer accessible digital collections, while others offer a range of online and offline services for 
users with disabilities. A good example is the Alexandria Library in Egypt, which offers a talking book service, 
e-Audiobooks, and closed-captioned video materials (as well as several in-house services such as live sign 
language interpretation and home delivery of materials to local residents who are unable to visit the library 
in person). 
The Accessible Books Consortium ( www.accessiblebooksconsortium.org ) offers a list of libraries and 
archives around the world which provide books in accessible formats. They emphasise the importance of 
the digital EPUB3 format, which allows for the creation of an electronic file that can then be used to produce 
accessible digital books in various formats, such as audiobooks with a synthesized voice or with human 
narration, and electronic braille (braille read on a computer with a refreshable braille keyboard).
There also exist a number of online digital libraries created explicitly for persons with disabilities. A good 
example is the US-based Bookshare , which has a holding of over 754,787 titles in accessible digital formats. 
Bookshare has a specialized web-based reader which allows readers to adjust settings like narrator voice, 
font size and style, colour, and “read-along” highlighting. The platform’s content is also compatible with 
third-party web readers and devices such as screen readers and Braille displays. Another example is the UK-
based National Accessible Library , which likewise offers thousands of online titles in a variety of accessible 
digital formats, including Microsoft Word, plain text, and Braille. Both of these online libraries are free to use 
for persons with disabilities and are continuously adding new titles to their collections. Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 5
Some online museum and galleries are also beginning to incorporate accessibility in their content. An 
example is the Sarjeant Gallery of New Zealand, which has made its entire collection available online, with 
each item accompanied by a text description of its key features (e.g. Figure 1). Some items, but not all, also 
feature longer, more detailed descriptions of the item’s history or creation process. The website complies 
with WCAG 2.0 standards and features simple layout and navigation. The website creators report that 
accessibility standards were kept in mind from day one, noting, “it’s often more difficult to change the 
design after launch, and accessibility compliance can often be forgotten after the rush of the first phase of 
development” (Rowe, 2017). 
Figure 1.  Text description of a painting from the Sarjeant Gallery’s online collection, describing the 
painting’s content and colour scheme. (Credit: Collection of the Sarjeant Gallery Te Whare o Rehua 
Whanganui. Gift of Barbara Pettigrew, in memory of her father Walter James White, 2018)
Another prominent example is the Chicago Museum of Contemporary Art (MCA), which has 
actually created its own software, called Coyote , to automatically recognize key features of 
an artwork and describe them with natural language text. Experts can than review and edit 
the automated descriptions, which are generally no longer than 30 words, to ensure they are 
accurate and understandable. Currently, only 10% of the images in the MCA’s online collection 
have descriptions, but this number is expected to increase (Voon, 2019).2. 
Analysis of a  
digital documentary 
heritage platform   
(UNESCO Memory of the World Register)
This chapter aims to demonstrate difficulties encountered by persons with 
disabilities when accessing digital documentary heritage by examining 
the accessibility of an online repository. UNESCO’s “Memory of the World 
International Register” has been chosen as an example. This chapter 
analyses the accessibility of the platform (i.e. navigation, color and contrast, 
links, images and forms) and the accessibility of the platform’s content 
(i.e. format of nomination forms and register entries). A brief summary 
accompanies the analysis with some recommendations. The work of Fray Bernardino de Sahagún (1499-1590). Inscribed in UNESCO  
Memory of the World Register by Mexico, Italy and Spain in 2015 
© Real Biblioteca de Madrid8 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
Analysis of a digital documentary heritage platform 
(UNESCO Memory of the World Register) 
In order to better understand the obstacles faced by persons with disabilities in accessing digital documentary 
heritage, it is useful to look at existing examples. In this chapter, we will investigate an existing online repository 
– the UNESCO “Memory of the World International Register”. 
The purpose of the Memory of the World programme is to safeguard the documentary heritage of the 
world. Documentary heritage comprises those single documents, or groups of documents, of significant 
and enduring value to a community, a culture, a country or to humanity generally, and whose deterioration 
or loss would be a harmful impoverishment for mankind. UNESCO established the programme in 1992. The 
impetus came from a growing awareness of the perilous state of preservation of and access to documentary 
heritage in various parts of the world. The vision of the Memory of the World is that the world’s documentary 
heritage belongs to all, should be fully preserved and protected for all, and should be permanently accessible 
to all without hindrance.
The most visible and famous part of the Memory of the World is the International Register: a list of (currently) 
430 single documents or groups of documents with global significance. The Memory of the World 
International Register is comparable with the better known World Heritage List, but is limited to documents. 
In the definition of the Memory of the World, documents include books, manuscripts, archival records, rock 
inscriptions, letters, diaries, maps, photos and films and also digital publications. Information on the Memory 
of the World programme and the International Register can be found at its website, https://en.unesco.org/
programme/mow/ .
Given the programme’s vision that the world’s documentary heritage should be accessible to all without 
hindrance, we will first investigate the accessibility of the programme’s homepage. Later on, the accessibility 
of the website’s content (digital heritage documents) will be discussed. A selection of 10 items from various 
categories and parts of the world was compiled for the content analysis.
A.  Accessibility of the Memory of the World 
website 
The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1 from the W3C organisation are recommendations of 
how web content should be organized so as to be accessible for people with different abilities. Most important 
parts of the WCAG are used to analyse the Memory of the World platform here. Navigation, images, forms, 
as well as color and contrast, are the aspects which are considered for analysing the platform. 
In order to examine the aforementioned aspects, a screen reader software was used. A screen reader reads 
the content aloud to visually impaired users via speech synthesis. It provides different functions, starting by 
listing the sections of a webpage (navigation menus, main content, footer, etc.), after which the user can 
activate different shortcut keys to show further listings, such as lists of link texts, headings, and labelled fields 
in forms. The visually impaired user then has the option to select any list element, and the screen reader 
begins reading out information from there. In this way, the user has the possibility to navigate and understand 
the webpage.
It should be noted that this analysis is not exhaustive. The goal of this analysis is not to draw any particular 
conclusions about the Memory of the World website, but rather to simply present examples of common 
accessibility issues frequently encountered on web platforms, particularly on web platforms presenting 
digital documentary content. Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 9
i. Navigation
It is important for users who cannot use a standard mouse handheld to be able to understand and interact 
with the functions on a website. For instance, by pressing the Tab key, the user should be able to move from 
one active element to the next. On the Memory of the World website, keyboard navigation is not possible 
on every page. For example, keyboard users do not have the same possibilities as mouse users to interact 
with the world map on the homepage (zooming in and out, moving from side to side, clicking on a pointer 
to go directly to an item description).
ii. Colour and contrast
WCAG 2.1 requires a so-called contrast ratio of 4.1:1. On the Memory of the World website, there are some 
places where this requirement is not fulfilled. There is a tool called WAVE which enables checking the color 
and contrast of a website. The screenshot below shows the elements on the webpage which do not have 
a high enough contrast ratio.
Figure 2a.  Screenshot of the main menu on the UNESCO the Memory of the World homepage. Items marked with 
a red “ABC” icon have been identified by the WAVE webtool as having severely low contrast. Specifically, the menu 
line “Home > Memory of the World Register” appears very light against the background, making it difficult to read.
Figure 2b.  Altered screenshot of the UNESCO the Memory of the World homepage, showing how correct text 
contrast should appear. The menu line “Home > Memory of the World Register” is now darker and thicker than 
how it appeared in Figure 2a. The higher contrast of the text makes it more legible for all users.
iii. Links
Link texts are very important for screen reader users to understand the target of the links before activating 
them. On the Memory of the World website, however, there are some link texts which are not understandable 
for screen reader users. As shown in the screenshot below, link texts such as ‘+’ and ‘—’ are unclear, a 
visually impaired user would not know what this refers to. Better link texts would be “zoom in (world map)” 
and “zoom out (world map)”.10 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
Figure 3.  Links List on the Memory of the World homepage, as shown by the screen-reader program JAWS. 
iv. Images
Screen reader users with visual disabilities can understand images if proper alternative text has been defined 
by the content creator. On the Memory of the World website however, there are many images (e.g. the world 
map) which have no proper alternative text.
v. Forms
Defining proper labels for form elements is crucial for screen reader users to understand and interact with the 
fields defined in a form. On the Memory of the World homepage, there are form elements for filtered searches, 
with which the user can search for register items by country, year, organization, etc. These elements are 
not clearly labelled, as such a visually impaired user would have no way of knowing what any given form 
field does. As shown in the screenshot below, the fields called “toggle dropdown button” are not intuitively 
labelled, and it is unclear what their purpose is.
Figure 4.  List of interactive form fields on the Memory of the World website, as shown by the screen reader 
program JAWS.Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 11
B.  Accessibility of the Memory of the World 
website content
This section brings some examples of the Memory of the World International Register to demonstrate 
accessibility issues. Please note that it is not a comprehensive analysis – however, it shows some important 
accessibility issues that persons with disabilities may encounter.
i. Nomination forms in PDF format
On the Memory of the World website, each registered item is accompanied by a nomination form in PDF 
format, in which more information is given about the history and significance of the item. PDFs present 
accessibility issues for many users with visual disabilities. One major issue is that elements such as page 
structure, headings, graphs or embedded images are generally indecipherable for screen readers. In order 
for this to be remedied, PDF elements require special “tags” to assist screen reader users. On the website, 
none of the nomination forms feature such tags, making them largely inaccessible for screen reader users.
ii. Register entries
• Example 1: Derveni Papyrus
The Derveni Papyrus is the oldest known European book, dated between 340-320 BC. It describes religious 
practices and also contains a song ascribed to the mythical singer Orpheus. This partially burned papyrus 
scroll is of immense importance for the study of early Greek religion and philosophy.
For persons with disabilities, the Memory of the World webpage on the Derveni papyrus should include 
alternative text with information about the format of a document (fragment, scroll, book), and information 
about the type of writings found on them. The Derveni Papyrus in the Memory of the World register contains 
a photo gallery with 8 images of papyrus fragments. A sighted viewer can discover after carefully observing 
the images that the fragments originally took the form of a long scroll. This information, however, is not 
described in textual form in the item’s description on the website. This information is essential for a blind user 
to get an idea about this document.
Figure 5.  Image of the Derveni Papyrus, the oldest “book” of Europe, as seen on the Memory of the World Register 
website. © Archaeological Museum of Thessaloniki12 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
• Example 2: Confucian Printing Woodblocks
This documentary heritage, collectively named the “Confucian Printing Woodblocks in Korea,” comprises 
64,226 hand-carved blocks, used for printing 718 titles of works written during the Joseon Dynasty 
(1392–1910). They cover a wide range of subjects, including literature, politics, economy, philosophy, and 
interpersonal relations. The ultimate theme is creating ideal communities built on Confucian morality.
Alternative text of images showing 3D items should contain the form, dimensions, and a description of the 
engraved text or figures. As an example, the Korean Confucian Printing Woodblocks entry in the Memory 
of the World register contains a photo gallery of several woodblocks, as well as two images of the archive 
building where they are held. However, in order to be accessible, the images should be accompanied by a 
textual description of the appearance of the blocks – such as their colour, shape (the blocks have handles 
on each end), size, or the types of characters engraved on them. 
Figure 6.  Image of the Confucian Printing Woodblocks as seen on the Memory of the World Register website. 
© Advanced Center for Korean Studies
• Example 3: Islamic stone inscription
Figure 7.  Image of the entry of the Earliest Islamic (Kufic) inscription as seen on the Memory of the World Register 
website.Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 13
This entry contains only a very brief description of a stone inscription from 644 AD on which date of death 
of the second Caliph of Islam is written. The short description on the website, shown in Figure 7, is missing 
key details. For example, it is not written here that the inscription is on a stone, nor is it clear how large the 
inscription is, where it is located, or where it was found. In order to garner any of these details, it is necessary 
to open the nomination form, which is a separate PDF. There are no images of the item, either on the website 
or in the nomination form.
• Example 4: The Historic 7th March Speech of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
Figure 8.  Image of the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman’s historic March 7th speech as shown on the 
Memory of the World Register website. © Bangladesh Betar, Bangladesh Film Archive, Liberation War Museum
This entry describes an audiovisual recording of a historic speech given by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman of 
Bangladesh in 1971. There are however no audiovisual materials accompanying this entry on the Memory of 
the World website, nor are there any links to audiovisual materials. There is a photo gallery available, however, 
the captions of the images provide relatively little information about the scene – such as the fact that the 
speaker is standing at a podium with several microphones, facing a crowd of thousands of people. This 
information is thus unavailable to users with visual impairments. Additionally, in some cases, the captions are 
written in the incorrect language (in this case, the captions are in French, although the image was visited via 
the English version of the website). Users can open the nomination form for more information – however, the 
nomination form is a poor-quality scanned PDF; it is not accessible for screen reader users. 
C.  Summary of analysis 
The Memory of the World Register website has some basic accessibility features, nevertheless, the website 
itself needs to be re-designed to make it more useable and accessible for people of all abilities, while the 
website’s content (items in the register, images, documents, etc.) should be adapted with better awareness 
of digital accessibility issues. The guidelines listed below should be applied.Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 15
3. 
Guidelines for 
accessible digitized 
heritage documents
This chapter presents two types of guidelines for creating an accessible 
digital documentary heritage repository: a) basic guidelines; b) advanced 
guidelines. The basic guidelines, which are more generic, are intended 
for the people commissioning documentary cultural heritage platforms. 
Meanwhile, the advanced guidelines, which are more technical, are geared 
towards the content creators of these platforms.“Bayasanghori Shâhnâmeh” (Prince Bayasanghor’s Book of the Kings). Inscribed in UNESCO  
Memory of the World Register by the Islamic Republic of Iran in 2007 
© Golestan Palace, Iranian Cultural Heritage and Tourism Organization (ICHTO), Iran.16 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
Guidelines for accessible digitized  
heritage documents
The short text “Fundamental principles of digitization of documentary heritage”, published by UNESCO 
(n.d.), provides a helpful procedure for the digitization process, breaking it down into four main stages: 
Planning, pre-digitization, digital conversion, and post-digitization processes. Each stage includes a series 
of critical steps, such as assessment of resources needed, selection of materials, collection of metadata, 
and quality control, to name a few. However, none of the steps take accessibility for persons with disabilities 
into account.
In this chapter, two guidelines for setting up an accessible digital documentary heritage repository are 
introduced: the “basic guidelines” and the “advanced guidelines”. Both guidelines are intended for different 
target groups: the basic guidelines, which are generic, are for those commissioning documentary cultural 
heritage platforms (e.g. institutions, project managers, curators), whereas the advanced guidelines are for 
the content creators of these platforms (e.g. editors, web developers).
A.  Basic guidelines
The following are general guidelines that should be taken into consideration prior to the establishment of a 
digital documentary heritage repository, although it is important to keep them in mind at any stage. 
1. Consider accessibility at every step of document digitization, rather 
than fixing accessibility issues post hoc.
Planning for accessibility from the beginning is more efficient and less costly than attempting to fix issues 
later. 
2. Plan to allocate sufficient resources for accessibility.
Accessibility should be incorporated into the budget of any documentary heritage project or programme. 
Disability development. Regular accessibility controls and updates should also be incorporated into budgets 
for existing projects. Disability inclusion does not need to be overly costly, especially if planned during the 
early stages of development. Regular accessibility controls and updates should also be incorporated into 
budgets for existing projects.
3. Involve persons with disabilities and/or accessibility experts in the 
process.
This recommendation is specifically defined in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and 
appears across many publications in the area of accessibility. In order to properly understand the variety 
of needs of all target users, persons with disabilities must be involved at every stage of development. This 
could include experts in the field, disability organisations, and potential users with various types of disability. Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 17
4. Work with experts in the subject material and the physical materials 
of the documents.
In order for a digitally archived item to be fully accessible, key details about the item must be provided in an 
accessible form, such as in a text description. An expert in the given subject matter can best identify how to 
describe this information. 
5. Describe content using simple, understandable language.
Describing information in a simple language enables all users, including persons with cognitive difficulties, 
to better understand the content. Structuring text into paragraphs, creating short sentences, and avoiding 
technical jargon, are some measures to ensure this.
6. Digital platforms must be designed with accessibility in mind.
Digital platforms, such as apps and websites, should be designed using international accessibility norms, 
like the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines  (WCAG 2.1). Elements such as layout, menus, buttons, forms, 
search functions and navigation must all be designed with accessibility in mind.
7. Organize digital accessibility awareness training for different 
stakeholders.
The fundamentals of digital accessibility, assistive technologies, and barriers for persons with disabilities, 
should be discussed in workshops or educational materials. It is recommended to involve persons with 
disabilities directly in the training, allowing them to explain firsthand the barriers they face.
The basic guidelines outlined above should be understood as a foundation for making digital documentary 
heritage accessible. They do not guarantee accessibility in and of themselves – rather, they lay the groundwork 
for any further, technical steps that may be required. Below is a set of more specific advanced guidelines 
which should be implemented to ensure accessibility of digital documentary content.
B.  Advanced guidelines
1. Digital images should be accompanied by a text description of their 
subject’s key features (content and form) and should be captured 
with the highest resolution possible.
Images make up a large proportion of digital content today and are especially prevalent in digital archives 
and galleries. In many cases, images are the most efficient way to digitally record a culturally important 
document, whether it’s a scan of a photograph or text on paper, or an image of a 3D artifact such as an 
engraving or sculpture. 
For many persons with visual impairments, digital images are inherently inaccessible. In order to be fully 
accessible, a digital image must be accompanied by a text description. As described in Chapter 2 above, 
many persons with visual impairments rely on screen reader technology to access digital content. A text 
description provides key information about images that would otherwise be inaccessible to persons with 
visual impairments. It can also be useful for users who rely on a talking browser to read websites due to a 
learning disability, as well as any users who might have difficulty understanding the meaning or relevance of 
an image.18 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
It is already common practice for digital archives to display basic textual information about each of its 
digitized items; usually this includes the item’s author/creator, year of creation, materials used, and size 
dimensions. This information is often shown as a caption or short text next to an image, much like the 
physical labels next to items in museums and galleries. However, such information, by itself, is not enough 
to render an image accessible. 
A good text description should include key details about both the content and the form of the item depicted 
in the image, with a particular focus on any features or elements that are culturally relevant. For example, a 
scan of a historically significant handwritten letter should be accompanied by either a full text transcript or an 
appropriate textual summary of the letter’s contents, whereas other details, such as ink colour or handwriting 
style, may be of less importance in such a case. On the other hand, page scans from an early biblical or 
Qu’ran manuscript might require more focus on style (such as illustrated letters, symbols, and drawings in 
the margins) than on content, which is already familiar to most and which can be easily accessed elsewhere.
Culturally important documents may have different reasons for being significant. This presents a challenge 
when it comes to creating an effective text description, because it first has to be established which information 
about an image should be included and which can be left out of the text description. For this reason, it is 
recommended that an expert in the relevant subject matter should be involved in creating an appropriate 
text description. 
2. Digital images should be resizable and use the highest resolution 
possible.
An important aspect to consider in terms of image accessibility is quality and resolution. High resolution 
not only ensures that the picture is as true to its subject as possible, but also enables image magnification 
without too much pixilation, making it easier for persons with vision impairments to explore the image by 
zooming in on it.
3. PDF documents should be screen-readable.
The PDF (“portable document format”) is another commonly used format in digital documents. It is most 
frequently used for scanned text documents, such as book pages or typed letters. Like digital images, PDFs 
present accessibility issues for many users with visual disabilities. One major issue is that scanned text in a 
PDF is not always recognisable to screen reader software; this is often the case with scanned handwritten 
documents, for example. Additionally, important elements such as page structure, graphs or embedded 
images are generally indecipherable for screen readers as well. 
In order for a PDF to be fully accessible, both its content and structure must be taken into account. Firstly, 
any relevant text with the PDF should be computer-recognisable. This is not only important for visually 
impaired users – it also enables word-searching functions, making it easier for all users to navigate through 
the document. If it is not possible to make text computer-recognisable, a separate transcript or appropriate 
summary of the text should be provided. Secondly, and equally important, a fully accessible PDF requires 
special modifications called “tags.” Tagging provides background-level information on the document’s 
structure (headings, figures, bullet lists, etc.), allowing screen-reading software to read the document in the 
correct order. It also allows for text alternatives of embedded images and graphs which would otherwise be 
inaccessible.
PDF tagging and accessibility testing can be done using the Adobe Acrobat  application or through an 
external service such as PAVE . Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 19
4. Videos should be accompanied by captions or sign language 
interpretation, as well as audio description.
Digital videos present accessibility issues for users with audio and visual disabilities. As such, it is important 
to consider the needs of both groups when working with multimedia files. 
a) Captions
Captions are text versions of the spoken word presented within multimedia. Though captioning is primarily 
intended for those who cannot hear the audio, it has also been found to help those that can hear audio 
content, those who may not be fluent in the language in which the audio is presented, those for whom the 
language spoken is not their primary language, etc. It is important that the captions are synchronized with 
the audio, and that they offer a true representation of spoken text and sounds. The captions must also be 
easily legible in terms of font size and colour contrast. Offering a selection of font sizes and colour/contrast 
for the captions is the best option, as this allows users to set the captions to suit their specific needs. 
Captions can be either closed or open. Closed captions can be turned on or off, whereas open captions are 
always visible. Open captions include the same text as closed captions, but are permanently embedded into 
the video picture, and cannot typically be turned off. Open captions give content creators more control over 
how the captions will appear (size, color, font, location, and timing), however, it can be more time consuming 
and expensive to produce than closed captions. Closed captions are most common, utilizing functionality 
within video players and browsers to display closed captions on top of or immediately below the video area. 
The most common web multimedia formats already support captioning.
b) Sign Language Interpretation
Another option is to add synchronized sign language interpretation in one corner of the frame. Many persons 
with auditory disabilities have difficulties with reading and may find sign language easier to follow. In addition, 
a sign language interpreter’s face and movements can intimate the emotion and rhythm of human speech 
with much greater nuance than captions or transcripts alone. This could be especially useful for clips that 
include spoken audio in which the speaker isn’t visible – such as scenes with background narration, for 
example.
c) Audio Description
Audio descriptions are intended for users with visual disabilities. They provide additional information about 
what is visible on the screen. This allows video content to be accessible to those with visual disabilities. 
Though they are not commonly utilized in television and movies, it is gaining in popularity. Audio descriptions 
are helpful in the case where visual content in web video provides important content that is not available 
through the audio alone. 
5. Audio should be accompanied by a text transcript.
Transcripts provide an important part of making web multimedia content accessible, as they allow anyone 
that cannot access audio content to read a text transcript instead. Transcripts do not necessarily have to 
be verbatim accounts of every utterance or sound contained in an audio file – however, they should contain 
any information which is relevant or significant. This is not only limited to dialogue, but should also include 
additional descriptions, explanations, or comments that may be beneficial, such as indications of laughter or 
important background sounds.
6. Provide content should be provided in multiple languages.
Providing content in multiple languages enables a broader outreach. Automatic translation is a cost-effective 
way to approach this, although translation quality should always be monitored when this option is used. 20 •  Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage
7. Consider alternative ways to present your content.
Providing alternatives to text description, such as interactive 3D scans, virtual reality, or videos describing 
the archived content, could improve comprehension of documentary heritage items for some people, such 
as those with cognitive difficulties. Creating 3D scans has the added bonus of providing 3D data, from 
which institutions or users could then to create 3D printouts. This would provide an opportunity for tactile 
interaction with a given item, helping all users, particularly those with visual or cognitive disabilities, to better 
understand and envision archived items.Accessible Digital Documentary Heritage • 21
References
Darvishy, Alireza; Manning, Juliet; and Erocal, Denis. (2019). Delivering Together for Inclusive Development: Digital 
Access to Information and Knowledge for Persons with Disabilities. UNESCO, 01/2019. 
Darvishy, Alireza. (2018). PDF Accessibility: Tools and Challenges. In: Computers Helping People with Special Needs, 
edited by Klaus Miesenberger and Georgios Kouroupetroglou, 07/2018. 
Dolson, Joseph C. (2008). Making video and audio usable for the deaf. Accessed August 4, 2019: https://www.
practicalecommerce.com/Accessibility-Making-Video-and-Audio-Usable-For-The-Deaf
ICT4IAL. (2015). Guidelines for Accessible Information. Available in 26 languages. Accessed September 10, 2019: 
https://www.ict4ial.eu/sites/default/files/Guidelines%20for%20Accessible%20Information_EN.pdf
Rowe, Paul. (2017). Building an accessible online collection for Sarjeant Gallery. Medium Magazine Online. Accessed 
September 13, 2019: https://medium.com/@armchair_caver/building-an-accessible-online-collection-for-
sarjeant-gallery-48cbcac4fdb6
UNESCO. (2019). Fundamental Principles of Digitization of Documentary Heritage. UNESCO.org. Accessed July 12, 
2019: http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/mow/digitization_guidelines_for_web.pdf
UNESCO. (1960). Recommendation concerning the Most Effective Means of Rendering Museums Accessible to 
Everyone. Accessed December 2, 2019: http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13063&URL_DO=DO_
TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
The United Nations. (2006). Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Treaty Series, 2515, 3.
United Nations. (1948) Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Accessed July 28, 2019. http://www.un.org/en/
universal-declaration-human-rights/
Voon, Claire (2019). This Open Source Software Could Make Museum Websites More Accessible. Artsy.net. 
Accessed September 8, 2019: https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-open-source-software-museum-
websites-accessible
World Health Organisation. (2019). Assistive devices and technologies. Accessed September 6, 2019: https://www.
who.int/disabilities/technology/en/
WebAIM. (2019). The WebAIM Million Update: A 6-month accessibility re-analysis of the top 1,000,000 home pages. 
Accessed September 13, 2019: https://webaim.org/projects/million/update
World Bank and WHO. (2011). World Report on Disability. Accessed December 2, 2019: https://www.who.int/
disabilities/world_report/2011/report/en/The recent emergence of digital cultural archives and 
collections – especially online collections – has brought 
about a huge leap forward in terms of global access to 
culture . Despite this positive development, however, 
digital content remains frequently inaccessible to 
persons with disabilities – particularly to those with 
vision, hearing, motor, or cognitive impairments . This 
publication captures barriers faced by persons with 
disabilities in getting access to digitized documentary 
heritage . Furthermore, this publication offers a set of 
guidelines for parties involved in the digitization of 
heritage documents, including librarians, archivists, 
museums workers, curators, and other stakeholders, 
with a view to promote the accessibility of digitized 
documentary heritage for persons of all abilities . 
Communication and 
Information Sector
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
Communication and Information Sector
Universal Access to Information Section
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP , France 