2020 UNESCO Report on the Monitoring and Reporting 
of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 (Public Access to Information)From Promise to Practice:
Access to Information
for Sustainable Development
introduction 1.0In setting out graphical guidelines on the use the UNESCO Logo Block 
across a full range of applications in the Logo Toolkit, we hope to achieve two 
objectives:
to enable the Secretariat and the National Commissions to use • 
theUNESCO visual identity correctly;
to help the Secretariat and the National Commissions to ensure the • 
correct application of graphic modalities when authorizing the use of the 
UNESCO brand.
The Logo Toolkit, however, does not specify the roles and responsibilities 
of the Governing Bodies, the Secretariat or the Member States. These are 
set out in the ‘Directives Concerning the Use of the Name, Acronym, Logo 
and Internet Domain Names of UNESCO’ (Resolution 34C/86), relevant 
administrative rules and regulations, and related guidelines elaborated for 
this purpose.
The toolkit consists of six sections:
Section 1 introduces the Logo Block and its key components.
Section 2 elaborates on the main principles for constructing the Logo Block.
Section 3 explains how the Logo Block should feature on specific 
applications.
Sections 4 & 5 use concrete examples to illustrate how these guidelines 
should be put into practice in a wide range of branding and co-branding 
situations. Section 4 presents cases of ‘statutory use’ by the governing 
bodies, the Secretariat as well as the National Commissions and Permanent 
Delegations. Section 5 gives examples of ‘authorized use’ for all those 
entities that require specific permission to make use of the UNESCO brand.
Section 6, a technical note concerning the use of electronic files provided by 
UNESCO.
Section 7, the Index, aims to provide a quick cross reference to the 
information contained in the toolkit.联合国教育、
科学及文化组织ﻣﻨﻈﻤﺔ ﺍﻷﻣﻢ ﺍﻟﻤﺘﺤﺪﺓ
ﻟﻠﺘﺮﺑﻴﺔ ﻭﺍﻟﻌﻠﻢ ﻭﺍﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔΟрганизация
Οбъединенньιх Ηаций по
вопросам образования,
науки и культурыOrganizaci ón
de las Naciones Unidas
para la Educación,
la Ciencia y la CulturaOrganisation
des Nations Unies
pour l’éducation,
la science et la cultureUnited Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization2Published in 2020 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP , France
© UNESCO 2020 
ISBN 978-92-3-100421-6
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/ ). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the 
terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository ( http://en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en ).
For the use of any material not clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be requested from: 
publication.copyright@unesco.org or UNESCO Publishing, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP 
This study should be cited as follows: UNESCO. 2020. Access to Information for Sustainable Development: From Promise 
to Practice, 2020 UNESCO Monitoring and Reporting of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 (Public Access to Information), Paris.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of 
any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.  
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO 
and do not commit the Organization. The same disclaimer applies to commissioned UNESCO research cited in this study. 
Research team:  Dian Kuswandini (UNESCO), Hussain Al Naser (UNESCO), Marcos Mendiburu (expert consultant)
Survey administration:  UNESCO Institute of Statistics
Graphic design, cover design and typeset:  Billy Anderson
Acknowledgements
UNESCO wishes to thank the following institutions that supported UNESCO’s 2020 Survey on SDG Indicator 16.10.2: the 
International Conference of Information Commissioners (ICIC); the International Ombudsman Institute (IOI); the Open 
Government Partnership (OGP); the Regional Network of Access to Information Practitioners in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (Red de Transparencia y Acceso a la Informacion, RTA); the African Freedom of Information Centre (AFIC); the 
Right to Information Commission of Sri Lanka and national SDG focal points for data collection. Acknowledgements are 
also due to the UNESCO staff who provided substantial inputs to the report: Guy Berger, Jaco du T oit and Rosa Gonzalez.
This report is supported by Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands through the International Programme for the 
Development of Communication (IPDC).
Printed in France
3T able of Content
This report is submitted to the Intergovernmental Council of the International Programme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC) in line with the Decision on Monitoring and Reporting of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 (Access to Information) adopted by the Council at its 61st session on 22 November 2018.
In its Decision, the IPDC Council encouraged the IPDC Secretariat to develop a mechanism that could involve and support 
Member States in data-collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access to information. The Council also requested the Secretariat to report to the IPDC Bureau in 2019 and Council in 2020, taking into account the results of the UN High-Level Political Forum held in New York, July 2019, about the progress made on access to information.
The present report provides an analysis of the subject matter, taking stock of the global progress on the adoption and 
implementation of legal guarantees on Access to Information, based on information provided by Member States through UNESCO’s 2020 Survey on Indicator 16.10.2 and other ongoing initiatives in the area.Executive Summary
1. Background and context
 A. Access to Information and Sustainable Dev elopment
 B. UNESCO and the Monitoring and Reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10. 2
2. Tracking progress on the adoption of ATI guarantees
 A. Global and regional ov erview
 B. Leaving No One Behind: Inclusion of disability rights in ATI guarantees
3. Tracking progress on the implementation of ATI guarantees: Highlights from
 UNESCO 2020 Surve y on SDG Indicator 16.10.2
 A. Overview
 B. Key findings
4. ATI reporting in the Voluntary National Reviews
5. Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: Case Studies
 a. Latin America and the Caribbean: Regional actions for global goa ls
 b. Sri Lanka: Promoting transparency across SDGs  through Access to
 Information
6. Conclusion
7. Decision4
667
10101213
13
1520232325
29
304Ensuring access to information (ATI) is critical for 
the achievement of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). This is further essential for advancing 
the promotion and protection of human rights and it 
empowers the public to make informed choices and 
effectively monitor and hold duty-bearers to account 
for SDG progress.
Within the United Nations, UNESCO has been 
designated as custodian agency for reporting on 
global progress by means of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 
concerning public access to information. The Indicator 
looks at “Number of countries that adopt and implement 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for 
public access to information.”
Under this mandate, UNESCO, via its International 
Programme for the Development of Communication 
(IPDC), has developed a methodology to measure 
and report on the adoption and implementation of 
ATI guarantees. This consists of a survey developed 
with the  UNESCO Institute of Statistics (UIS) and 
in consultation with experts, which yielded valuable 
data through a pilot exercise in 43 states in 2019.1 
The survey, comprising a National Questionnaire 
(targeted at ATI oversight bodies) and an Institutional 
Questionnaire (targeted at public authorities), was 
further refined for submission to all Member States in 
2020 .
UNESCO and UIS launched the survey in February 
2020, inviting all UN Member States, including their 
associated territories, to participate in the survey. 
The survey, however, coincided with the COVID-19 
pandemic, and generated only 29 responses. In some 
cases, the SDG monitoring bodies were constrained 
due to a disconnect with the ATI oversight bodies 
holding the data. In light of this, UNESCO extended 
the research to collect additional responses directly 
from ATI oversight bodies, which raised the total of 
responses to 69 states and associated territories. 
1 Powering sustainable development with access to information: highlights from the 2019 UNESCO monitoring and reporting 
of SDG indicator 16.10.2:  https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000369160?posInSet=2&queryId=6d5dfcc0-142b-
46ec-a3c9-6112fc055d6aExecutive Summary 27
USAGE LOGO: COLOUR  VERSIONSDG LOGO FOR ENTITIES WITHIN UN SYSTEM
HORIZONTAL LOGOLOGO
The COLOUR VERSION of the Sustainable Development Goals logo 
is ONLY to be used on a white or light grey background. See colour 
values to the right. LIGHT GREY
PMS:  Cool Gray 1C
R 241 G 241 B 241
C 4 M 3 Y 3 K 0
T arget 16.10:  
“Ensure public access 
to information and 
protect fundamental 
freedoms, in 
accordance with 
national legislation 
and international 
agreements. ”
Indicator 16.10.1:
“Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, 
enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention 
and torture of journalists, associated media 
personnel, trade unionists and human rights 
advocates in the previous 12 months. ”
*OHCHR as Custodian Agency; UNESCO and ILO 
as Contributing Agencies
Indicator 16.10.2:
“Number of countries that adopt and 
implement constitutional, statutory and/
or policy guarantees for public access to 
information. ”
* UNESCO as Custodian AgencyGoal 16:
“Promote peaceful 
and inclusive societies 
for sustainable 
development, provide 
access to justice for all 
and build effective,
accountable and 
inclusive institutions at 
all levels and inclusive 
societies. ”
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS
UNITED NATIONS DEPARTMENT OF GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS
May 2020GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE SDG LOGO 
INCLUDING THE COLOUR WHEEL, AND 17 ICONS.5The 2020 survey yields many insights into the main tendencies in the implementation of 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information worldwide. The 
findings enable a better understanding of the gaps and challenges that need to be addressed by 
countries in their efforts towards achieving the SDGs.
Among the conclusions arising from the survey is that, while 127 UN Member States have adopted 
various ATI legal guarantees, states that have not adopted such guarantees could boost ATI for 
their citizens by considering similar steps. Further, the survey shows that even where there are 
guarantees, more efforts are needed to ensure effective implementation of ATI. Those respondents 
who have a specialised ATI oversight body are likely to perform better in implementation than those 
without.
The findings also show that such oversight bodies should be fully functional, i.e. have the capacity to 
perform their duties, which include the monitoring and reporting of ATI in their jurisdiction. In this 
regard, the survey revealed gaps in record-keeping. Adequate and reliable records of the requests 
and appeals received, and their processing times, are essential for generating evidence to track 
progress of ATI as part of the SDGs.
The case studies presented in this report, focusing on Sri Lanka and the Latin American and the 
Caribbean region, give visibility to national and regional co-operation efforts on monitoring ATI, 
and show how proactive ATI oversight bodies can contribute to the attainment of SDG 16 as well 
as other SDGs.
Since the pilot phase in 2019, UNESCO’s survey has brought impact beyond measuring countries’ 
progress on achieving SDG T arget 16.10. Many local actors, including ATI oversight bodies and civil 
society actors, have been mobilised to network with each other in collecting data for the survey. They 
have also used the information assembled to identify areas of improvement. As such, the survey is 
not only contributing to assessing SDG Indicator 16.10.2, but also to securing ATI implementation.  
However, the research process also showed that there is a need to link ATI oversight bodies with 
national SDG processes for monitoring and reporting.
In a bid to ensure greater participation of countries in the 
monitoring and reporting on Indicator 16.10.2 towards 
2030 and beyond, UNESCO will continue to work with 
governments, experts, civil society and other UN agencies 
to improve existing data collection and its methodology. 
The objective is to have data collection conducted by 
countries annually, so that monitoring and reporting 
become sustainable and institutionalised, contributing to 
an effective implementation of ATI laws and the overall 
attainment of the SDGs.Executive Summary
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS
UNITED NATIONS DEPARTMENT OF GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS
May 2020GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE SDG LOGO 
INCLUDING THE COLOUR WHEEL, AND 17 ICONS.62 https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/story/unep-implementing-principle-10-rio-declaration
3 Adopted in 2015 by all 193 UN member states, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ( https://sustainabledevelopment.
un.org/post2015/transformingourworld/publication ) is a 15-year plan of action “to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure 
prosperity for all, while strengthening universal peace in larger freedom” . 
4 https://en.unesco.org/news/proclaims-international-day-universal-access-information  
5 Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development: https://undocs.org/A/RES/71/313  
6 Such as Article 10 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption; resolutions of the UN General Assembly and Human 
Rights Council; the Commonwealth’s Model Freedom of Information Bill; Organization of American States (OAS)’s Model Law on 
Access to Information; African Union’s Model Law on Access to Information and reports from the UN the Special Rapporteur on 
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. 
7 https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/ files/unpacking_indicator16102.pdf1. Background and context
A. Access to Information and Sustainable Development
Access to information has been acknowledged as a key element of sustainable development since 
the adoption of the Rio Declaration in 1992.2 Further in 2015, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development3 recognised ATI as a necessary enabling mechanism for transparent, accountable 
and participatory governance, rule of law and peaceful societies as epitomised by Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG) number 16: ‘Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions’ . T arget 16.10 calls for 
states to “ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with 
national legislation and international agreements” .
In 2015, UNESCO’s 38th General Conference declared 28 September as the International Day 
for Universal Access to Information. UNESCO’s co-operation with Member States, UN bodies and 
African civil society saw the status of the celebration being elevated when the 74th UN General 
Assembly  in October 2019 also proclaimed the Day at UN level.4
All this momentum has accompanied and reinforced 
concrete steps towards tracking the progress on 
ATI. SDG Indicator 16.10.2 was agreed by the UN 
Statistics Commission in 2016 and approved by 
the UN General Assembly in 2017.5 The Indicator 
measures the adoption and implementation of 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees 
for public access to information in accordance with 
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and of the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights.
Conceptually, ‘public access to information’ refers to the presence of an effective system to meet 
citizens’ rights to seek and receive information, particularly that held by or on behalf of public 
authorities. Several existing frameworks and documents recognised internationally 6 mention 
principles of ATI, including existence of legal frameworks with provisions for access to information 
such as limited exemptions; obligation of public authorities to provide information (including 
proactively); oversight and appeals mechanism; and record keeping. These principles of ATI, are 
often reflected, to varying degrees, in Freedom of Information (FOI) or Right to Information (RTI) 
laws and/or policies.7Access to information 
has been acknowledged 
as a key element 
of sustainable 
development.“SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS
UNITED NATIONS DEPARTMENT OF GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS
May 2020GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE SDG LOGO 
INCLUDING THE COLOUR WHEEL, AND 17 ICONS.78 https://undocs.org/A/HRC/44/L.18/Rev.1  
9 The IAEG-SDGs developed a system of tiers, or levels, to classify each SDG indicator based on its methodological development 
and the availability of data at the global level. The tier-system helps monitor the quality and availability of data, allowing for better 
understanding and addressing the gaps in achieving the SDGs. Tier 1 indicators are those with an internationally established 
methodology and standards, and where data are regularly produced by countries for at least 50 per cent of countries and of 
the population in every region where the indicator is relevant. Meanwhile, Indicators in Tier 2 are those with an internationally 
established methodology and standards are available, but data are not regularly produced.B. UNESCO and the Monitoring and Reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2The Human Rights Council in its 2020 resolution on freedom of opinion and expression ( General 
Assembly A/HRC/44/L.18/Rev.1 )8 at its 44th regular session recognises that “public authorities 
should strive to make information available, whether the information is proactively published 
electronically, or provided upon request... ” . The Council further elaborated on elements for related 
laws and policies.
Within the perspective of the 2030 Agenda, access to information is critical for empowering the public 
to make decisions, holding governments accountable, evaluating public officials in implementing and 
monitoring the SDGs, and facilitating effective public participation.
Custodianship of SDG Indicator 16.10.2
Prior to the adoption of the SDGs, the 29th session of the Intergovernmental Council of UNESCO’s 
International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC) urged that freedom of 
expression, along with the issues of free, independent and pluralistic media should be integrated into 
the Post-2015 Development Agenda. The eventual elaboration of the SDG T arget 16.10, as well as 
Indicators 16.10.1 and 16.10.2 was in fact a cumulative effort of advocacy by IPDC along with other 
UN agencies and civil society organizations, including the Global Forum for Media Development 
(GFMD).
Following the approval of the SDG framework in 2017 by the UN General Assembly, UNESCO was 
designated as the custodian agency for Indicator 16.10.2. Under this mandate, UNESCO monitors 
and reports to the UN Secretary General each year on “the number of countries that adopt and 
implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information” , giving 
attention to both components: “adoption” and “implementation” .
In 2019, as a result of UNESCO reporting in previous years to the UN Secretary General, Indicator 
16.10.2 was upgraded from Tier II to Tier I  —the highest level in the classification system developed to 
rank SDG indicators.9 This upgrade was agreed by the Inter-agency and Expert Group on Sustainable 
Development Goal Indicators (IAEG-SDGs) in October 2019. The reclassification means that 
Member States now have a further reason to include Indicator 16.10.2 in their own SDG monitoring 
strategies.810 https://en.unesco.org/news/ipdc-council-encourages-further-development-mechanism-monitor-and-report-access-information
11 https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco-convenes-experts-advance-monitoring-and-reporting-access-information
12 https://en.unesco.org/news/information-commissioners-key-successful-monitoring-and-reporting-sdg-16102UNESCO’s work on ATI monitoring and reporting
In the Decision of the Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC on 
Monitoring and Reporting of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 , adopted by 
the Council at its 31st session in November 201810, the IPDC 
Council encouraged the IPDC Secretariat, in cooperation with 
UNESCO’s Information  For  All  Programme (IFAP), to develop a 
mechanism that could strengthen UNESCO’s work as custodian 
agency for the global monitoring of progress. The Council further 
urged that the mechanism involve and support countries in the 
data collection and reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2.
As a response to the Decision, UNESCO and its Institute for Statistics (UIS) developed a methodology 
to help measure and report on Indicator 16.10.2. This consists of a survey developed in consultation11 
with experts, concerned organizations, and the IFAP Secretariat. The survey was piloted in 2019  in 
43 countries, with the findings presented the same year at a side-event during the UN’s High-Level 
Political Forum. The instrument was then further refined for a full deployment in 2020  and will be 
further refined on the basis of this experience. The Secretariat is currently working with the UIS and 
the IAEG-SDGs to ensure that the updated version of the survey is reflected within the metadata.
In the same 2018 IPDC Decision, the IPDC Secretariat, Council and Bureau were also encouraged 
to keep supporting Member States in data-collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2. In this 
regard, with the support of various donors to IPDC, UNESCO has been able to facilitate capacity 
development initiatives and awareness-raising efforts in several countries, such as Côte d’Ivoire, 
Ethiopia, Ghana, Indonesia, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Rwanda, Senegal, and Tunisia as well as 
in the Latin America region. This line of action has been done through collaboration with information 
commissioners and their networks. In this way for instance, during the 11th International Conference 
of Information Commissioners held in Johannesburg, South Africa, around 50 representatives 
from ATI oversight bodies and Civil Society Organisations (CSOs)  have improved their capacity in 
monitoring and reporting on Indicator 16.10.2 and in contextualizing the significance of their work in 
the wider framework of the SDGs.12
The IPDC Council, in the 2018 Decision, also encouraged countries to monitor progress on ATI, 
including through the Voluntary National Reviews (VNR) system, which offers a tool for the follow-
up and review mechanisms on SDG 16 (Section 4 of this report further discusses the VNRs). In this 
regard, participating in the UNESCO survey on Indicator 16.10.2 has been proven to be useful for 
countries as they can repurpose the data submitted to the survey for their VNRs. Côte d’Ivoire, 
Indonesia, and Tunisia, for example, used the data collected for the UNESCO survey in the preparation 
of their VNRs in 2019.
9UNESCO has also been engaged in various joint efforts with other UN entities and civil society. 
Under the umbrella of the Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just and Inclusive 
Societies13, collaboration has been established through a series of events organised ahead of and 
during the UN High-Level Political Forum on the Sustainable Development. The Alliance has also 
been working on developing SDG-related guidelines and resources to support countries in their 
monitoring and reporting. In 2020, the Alliance’s partnership continues with the “SDG 16 National 
Monitoring Initiative” – a project on monitoring national progress on Goal 16 that is being planned in 
16 countries.14
13 The Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just and Inclusive Societies ( https://www.un-globalalliance.org/ ) 
is a coordinating platform for Member States, private sector, civil society and UN entities to work together for SDG16+. The 
Alliance is operated by 7 Member States (Cabo Verde, Mexico, Norway, Qatar, Sierra Leone, Tunisia, and the United Kingdom), 3 
CSOs (NYU Centre on International Cooperation, Transparency and Accountability Network, and World Federation of United 
Nations Associations), and 3 businesses (Deloitte Ltd., LexisNexis, and White & Case LLP). Its work is supported by a Secretariat 
co-facilitated by UNDP , UNODC, UNESCO, OHCHR, UNHCR, UN-Women, and the Global Compact (a UN Advisory Group 
composed of 10 UN Agencies, and partners from other governments, CSOs and business).
14 Argentina, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Colombia, El Salvador, Georgia, Indonesia, Lebanon, Mexico, 
Moldova, Mongolia, South Africa, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, and Uruguay.*** Civil society may also present
a Shadow/Spotlight Report on
SDG 16.10.2 during the UN High-
Level Political ForumATI Oversight Bodies
(Information Commissions/
Data Protection or Privacy
Commissions/
Ombudsmand/ National
Human RIghts Institutions.
Relevant Ministries)
Exchange of inputs
and/or collaborate inthe monitoring andreporting on SDG16.10.2Exchange of inputsand/or collaborate in
the monitoring and
reporting on SDG
16.10.2Provides technical support
Provides data through UNESCO
Survey on SDG 16.10.2Reportsprogress onSDG 16.10.2
Reports
progress on
SDG 16.10.2
National
stakeholders
(Civil Society, Media,
Academia, etc.)GovernmentUN
Secretary-
General
Progress
Report on
SDGsVoluntary
National
Reviews
(VNRs)UNFlowchart of data collection and 
reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2FIGURE 1:1015 Argentina, Bahamas, Sri Lanka, Cyprus, Fiji, Ghana, Kenya, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malawi, Morocco, Vanuatu
Philippines, Timor-Leste, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Seychelles, Viet Nam, T ogo, United Republic of T anzania.
16 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018.
17 Lichtenstein is not a member of UNESCO
18 United States of America withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018.2.  Tracking progress on the adoption
 of ATI guarantees  
A. Global and regional overview
Progress has been recorded in terms of binding laws and policies giving individuals a right to access 
information held by public authorities. As of July 2020, 127 UN Member States have adopted 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information, with at least 19 
countries adopting such guarantees since the 2030 Agenda in 2015.15
Europe and North America (49)
1.  Albania
2.  Azerbaijan
3.  Austria
4.  Armenia
5.  Belgium
6.  Bosnia and
 Herzegovina
7.  Bulgaria
8.  Canada
9.  Croatia
10.  Cyprus
11.  Czechia
12.  Denmark
13.  Estonia
14.  Finland
15.  France
16.  Georgia
17.  Germany
18.  Greece19.  Hungary
20.  Iceland
21.  Ireland
22.  Israel16
23.  Italy
24.  Latvia
25.  Liechtenstein17
26.  Lithuania
27.  Luxembourg
28.  Malta
29.  Monaco
30.  Montenegro
31.  Netherlands
32.  North Macedonia
33.  Norway
34.  Poland
35.  Portugal
36.  Republic of
 Moldova37.  Romania
38.  Russian
 Federation
39.  San Marino
40.  Serbia
41.  Slovakia
42.  Slovenia
43.  Spain
44.  Sweden
45.  Switzerland
46.  Turkey
47.  Ukraine
48.  United Kingdom
 of Great Britain
 and Northern
 Ireland
49.  United States of
 America18TABLE 1:
Regional aggregates of UN Member States that have adopted constitutional, statutory 
and/or policy guarantees for public access to information (grouped based on the 
execution of regional activities by UNESCO)
11Latin America and the Caribbean (24)
Africa (21)Asia and the Pacific (27)
Arab States (6)1. Antigua and
 Barbuda
2. Argentina
3. Bahamas
4. Belize
5. Bolivia
 (Plurinational
 State of)
6. Brazil
7. Chile
8. Colombia9. Dominican
 Republic
10. Ecuador
11. El Salvador
12. Guatemala
13. Guyana
14. Honduras
15. Jamaica
16. Mexico
17. Nicaragua
18. Panama19. Paraguay
20. Peru
21. Saint Kitts and
 Nevis
22. Saint Vincent and
 the Grenadines
23. Trinidad and
 T obago
24. Uruguay
1. Angola
2. Benin
3. Burkina Faso
4. Côte d’Ivoire
5. Ethiopia
6. Ghana
7. Kenya
8. Liberia9. Malawi
10. Mozambique
11. Niger
12. Nigeria
13. Rwanda
14. Seychelles
15. Sierra Leone
16. South Africa17. South Sudan
18. T ogo
19. Uganda
20. United Republic
 of T anzania
21. Zimbabwe1. Afghanistan
2. Australia
3. Bangladesh
4. China
5. Cook Islands
6. Fiji
7. India
8. Indonesia
9. Iran (Islamic
 Republic of)10. Japan
11. Kazakhstan
12. Kyrgyzstan
13. Maldives
14. Mongolia
15. Nepal
16. New Zealand
17. Pakistan
18. Palau
19. Philippines20. Republic of
 Korea
21. Sri Lanka
22. T ajikistan
23. Thailand
24. Timor-Leste
25. Uzbekistan
26. Vanuatu
27. Viet Nam
1. Jordan
2. Lebanon3. Morocco
4. Sudan5. Tunisia
6. Yemen
12B. Leaving No One Behind: Inclusion of disability rights in ATI guarantees
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, pledging to “leave no one behind, ” calls upon 
countries to ensure the full and equal participation of persons with disabilities in all spheres of society 
and create enabling environments by, for and with persons with disabilities, in accordance with the 
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities  (CRPD).
The CRPD recognises that civil and political rights, including the right to information, are a vital 
prerequisite for persons with disabilities to overcome histories of exclusion. Article 21 on Freedom 
of expression and opinion, and access to information explicitly states that States Parties shall take all 
appropriate measures to ensure that persons with disabilities can exercise the right to freedom of 
expression and opinion, including the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas on 
an equal basis with others and through all forms of communication of their choice.
ATI laws in several countries acknowledge the importance of accessibility to information by persons 
with disabilities. Out of 127 countries with ATI laws, 64% include formal provisions that accommodate 
persons with disabilities when requesting information, such as:  
 i. providing appropriate forms of assistance and support to persons with disabilities to  
  ensure their access to information (in line with Article 9 of the CRPD); and 
 ii. presenting information in accessible or usable formats for persons with disabilities (in  
  accordance with Article 21 of the CRPD).
While promoting ATI norms and standards that are inclusive of persons with disabilities is key, putting 
them into practice is equally important to guarantee their effectiveness. In this regard, the monitoring 
of Indicator 16.10.2 provides an opportunity for countries and other concerned stakeholders to 
improve actual implementation of the provisions of normative instruments such as the CRPD. Element Type Country
                     
                        Making 
                        requestAssistance by public information 
officer (PIO) in writing down oral 
requests and providing a copy/record 
to the applicant.Afghanistan, Antigua, Azerbaijan, 
Ethiopia, Ghana, Greece, India, Kenya, 
Maldives, Nepal, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, 
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, T anzania.
Involvement of a third party to obtain 
the information on behalf of the 
requestorMalawi.
Clear explanation on the procedures 
and conditionsArmenia, Estonia, Viet Nam, Yemen. 
General assistance to enable a 
requester to access such information 
(with no specific details)Australia, Bangladesh, Belize, Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, Cook Islands, Croatia, 
Cyprus, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, 
Guyana, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, 
Liberia, Malta, Mozambique, Pakistan, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia.
                       
                       Releasing 
                       informationProvision of copy of record in an 
alternative format, or other assistance 
that may require to access the 
information given.Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, 
India, Malawi, Mexico, Montenegro, 
Nicaragua, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, 
Zimbabwe.TABLE 2: Range of inclusion of disability issues in ATI laws in various countries133. Tracking progress on the implementation of ATI 
guarantees: highlights from the UNESCO 2020 
Survey on SDG Indicator 16.10.2
A. Overview
In 2020, UNESCO invited all UN Member States, including associated territories, to participate in 
the survey based upon on SDG Indicator 16.10.2. The survey took place between February and June 
2020. In spite of deadline extensions to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the survey 
received a limited number of responses.  A number of SDG monitoring bodies lacked links with the 
ATI oversight institutions holding the data which curtailed their ability to respond.
The pandemic further highlighted the need to collect more focused and essential data, taking into 
consideration the capacity of local actors on the ground in this period. The survey initially consisted 
of a National Questionnaire (targeted at ATI oversight bodies) and an Institutional Questionnaire 
(targeted at three public authorities19 ). However, in view of COVID-19, UNESCO put the focus on 
the National Questionnaire and responses from ATI oversight bodies as the main data holders in 
many countries. This helped to secure the participation of 69 countries and associated territories, a 
significant increase from 29 countries that submitted responses during early phase of the survey in 
April 2020. 
Europe and North America (23)• : Countries (including territories) that have adopted Access to Information (ATI) guarantees
Albania  •
Armenia  •
Belgium  •
Croatia  •
Cyprus  •
Czechia  •
Estonia  •
France  •Gibraltar (territory of United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland)21  •
Hungary  •
Ireland  •
Isle of Man (territory of United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland)22  •
Israel**  •
Jersey (territory of United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland)23  •
Latvia  •
North Macedonia  •Portugal  •
Romania  •
Serbia  •
Slovenia  •
Spain  •
Switzerland  •
United States of America**  •
19 UNESCO’s survey on SDG Indicator 16.10.2. was designed to measure ATI progress by assessing the “systemic performance” of 
ATI oversight bodies, and the “direct performance” of public authorities that receive requests for information from the public. The 
Ministries of Environment and Finance have been chosen as the main public authorities to respond the survey due to their direct 
relevance to the 2030. The third authority, the National Capital, was chosen due to their direct relevance to the UN Urban Agenda 
where it says that as much as 65% of the SDG agenda may not be fully achieved without the involvement of cities.
20 The territories responding to the survey were: Gibraltar, Isle of Man, Jersey and Cayman Islands, that are territories depended 
on the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
21 Gibraltar is a non-self-governing territory administrated by the United Kingdom.
22 The Isle of Man is an internally self-governing dependency of the British Crown, United Kingdom. 
23 Jersey is an internally self-governing dependency of the British Crown, United Kingdom.TABLE 3: UN Member States* (including territories)20 that responded to UNESCO 2020 Survey 
on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 (grouped according to the execution of regional activities 
by UNESCO)14* United States of America and Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018
24 Cayman Islands is a non-self-governing territory administrated by the United Kingdom.Latin America & the Caribbean (17)
T otal responding countries 
and territories
The number of which adopted 
Access to Information (ATI) 
guarantees69
62 89.85%Asia and the Pacific (18)
Africa (9)
Arab States (2)• : Countries (including territories) that have adopted Access to Information (ATI) guarantees
Argentina  •
Brazil  •
Cayman Islands (territory of 
United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland)24  •
Chile  •
Colombia  •
Costa Rica  •
Afghanistan  •
Australia  •
Bangladesh  •
China  •
Cook Islands  •
Indonesia  •
Côte d’Ivoire  •
Democratic Republic of Congo
Gambia
Jordan  •Dominican Republic  •
Ecuador  •
El Salvador  •
Guatemala  •
Honduras  •
Jamaica  •
Kyrgyzstan  •
Myanmar
Nepal  •
New Zealand  •
Palau  •
Philippines  •
Kenya  •
Liberia  •
Madagascar
Tunisia  •Mexico  •
Panama  •
Paraguay  •
Peru  •
Uruguay  •
Republic of Korea  •
Samoa
Singapore
Thailand  •
Turkey  •
Uzbekistan  •
Sierra Leone  •
South Africa  •
South Sudan  •15B. Key findings
1. National regulation systems are increasingly conducive to public access to information
The right to access to information can be enshrined in a constitution and further regulated in a 
dedicated policy and/or a law on right to information that could ensure its effectiveness.
From the 69 countries and associated territories responding to the UNESCO survey, 89.85% (62) 
reported to have constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for ATI. Two countries reported 
an absence of any ATI guarantees, and five others reported that such guarantees are still ‘in progress’ .
Out of the 62 countries and associated territories with guarantees for ATI, 49 – or 79% – reported 
that their laws contained a specific provision to mandate public bodies to proactively disclose 
information , while one country reported that a lack thereof. The remaining 12 did not provide a 
response.
Such an obligation for public bodies to proactively disclose information has several positive effects. 
For example, it minimises the time, money and effort required by the public to access information. 
It also reduces the number of requests that these bodies must process, thereby easing the 
administrative burden on government of implementing ATI laws. Where this is automated, such 
as with procurement data, difficulties such as those related to human resources in the COVID-19 
period, can be mitigated.25
A total of 45 out of the 62 respondents indicated in the survey that they are members of the 
Open Government Partnerships (OGP) .26 Some have adopted commitments for implementing 
or strengthening the operation of their ATI legislation as part of their OGP national action plans. 
A number of OGP non-member countries also reported that they adopted some form of open 
government declaration or plan.27
2. Dedicated ATI oversight bodies are well established in most countries, but more precision is 
needed with regard to their different functions 
Oversight mechanisms refer to the process of supervision, monitoring and evaluation of performance 
to ensure compliance with ATI legislation. In the context of ATI implementation, while some countries 
have a specialised body (i.e. focusing only on ATI), others have a multi-purpose body (i.e. an ombudsman 
or a human rights commission, which also performs various functions).
25 See the 2020 UNESCO issue brief in the series World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development:  “The right 
to information in times of crisis: access to information – saving lives, building trust, bringing hope!” https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000374369  
26 The Open Government Partnership is a multilateral initiative overseeing by a steering committee including representatives of 
governments and CSOs. It aims at promoting open government, empowering citizens, fighting corruption and harnessing new 
technologies to strengthen governance.
27 This list includes, among others, Bangladesh, China, Gambia, Madagascar, and Switzerland.16Out of the 62 countries and territories with ATI legislation responding to the UNESCO survey, 49 
reported on the type of ATI oversight body . Several responding countries and territories reported 
more than one body responsible for overseeing the ATI regime. For instance, Albania, Argentina, 
Australia and Estonia reported an Information Commission and a Data Protection or Privacy 
Commission/er, while Bangladesh reported a Ministry and an Information Commission. A total of 30 
responding countries and territories selected two or more types of oversight bodies in response to 
this specific question. Further analysis is therefore required on the specific functions performed by 
each of them within a country. 
The predominant ATI oversight body reported was an information commission/ commissioner (34)28, 
followed by data protection or privacy commission/commissioner (21), then a specific department/ 
ministry or agency (19), an ombudsman institution (16), a human rights commission (12), and other 
(7).
Regardless of the type of ATI oversight bodies, the top three activities  reported were to provide 
implementation guidance (77%); to provide comments on compatibility of draft legislation with the 
ATI law (74%) and to publish an annual report (74%). It is worth noting that a few countries and 
territories responded to this question for more than one ATI oversight body.Information 
Commission
Provide 
implementation 
guidanceOffer training to 
officialsRaise public 
awarenessGive comments 
on compatibility 
of draft 
legislation with 
ATI law -Publish an annual 
reportRequire public 
authorities to 
create records 
of their activities 
and decisionsData protection 
or privacy 
CommissionHuman Rights 
CommissionOmbudsman Department /
Ministry / 
AgencyOther
FIGURE 2: Types of ATI Oversight Bodies
FIGURE 3: Types of activities performed by ATI Oversight Bodies3431%
77% 73% 70% 75% 75% 63%19% 11% 15% 17% 6%
21 12 16 19 7
55 52 50 53 53 45173. Appeals mechanisms with binding power exist in most countries, but data on appeals are still 
not available in many countries
Distinct from the oversight function, the appeals function deals with reviewing requests to reconsider 
decisions relating to refusal of information disclosure.29 In some countries, the same ATI oversight 
body is also tasked with processing appeals, while in other countries this is done by a separate body.  
The issue of further appeal through a judicial system is not considered in this report.
Out of the 62 countries and territories with ATI legislation responding to the UNESCO survey, 48 
reported on the type of ATI appeals body . The predominant ATI appeals body reported was an 
information commission or commissioner (35), followed by a data protection or privacy commission/ 
commissioner (16), a specific department, ministry or agency (12), an Ombud institution (11), a 
human rights commission (6), and others (6)30. A few responding countries or territories selected 
more than one option in terms of ATI appeals bodies.31
The UNESCO survey also looked at whether or not the decisions of the ATI appeals bodies are 
binding . Established international standards in ATI provisions have called for granting ATI oversight 
bodies with binding decision power. One main argument is that such power gives the body the ability 
to force disclosure of information when public authorities may be slow or reluctant to do so. Equally 
important, this can allow legal precedents to which the public authorities and oversight body staff 
can refer when dealing with similar requests and appeals.
The survey revealed that out of the 35 countries and territories that indicated an information 
commission as an appeals body, 25 (71%) reported that the body makes binding decisions, while 
8 (23%) lack such prerogative and 2 (6%) did not provide a response. The chart below shows the 
binding power of different type of appeals bodies.
Information 
CommissionData protection 
or privacy 
CommissionHuman Rights 
Commission
Yes No No answerOmbudsman Department /
Ministry / 
AgencyOther
FIGURE 4: Binding power with regard to decisions made by different ATI Appeals Bodies71% 88% 67% 73% 75% 100% 18% 9% 8% 0% 0% 23% 6% 6% 17% 17% 17% 6%18With respect to the number of appeals  received, only 29 countries and territories reported on this 
question. Of the 29 countries, Asia and the Pacific reported 6,158 appeals, while Europe and North 
America reported 4,794 appeals. In Latin America and the Caribbean, 2,121 appeals were reported. 
Africa recorded 148 appeals, while the Arab States recorded 6 appeals.
Concerning the number of external appeals granted – either partially or fully, as well as dismissed, 
there is an important caveat to be made. In a couple of cases, countries indicated that data on appeals 
relate only to formal decisions made by the ATI appeals body. Yet, most appeals received by these ATI 
appeals bodies were resolved through other means – for instance, through mediation. Therefore, 
they did not result in a formal decision by the ATI appeals body, and this was not captured as a granted 
appeal in its statistical data. In one case, it was also noted that a few appeals were finally settled, 
withdrawn or discontinued during the review process.
4. Much needs to be done by ATI oversight bodies to improve good records of the requests they 
receive and how they are processed
Out of the 62 responding countries and territories with ATI legislation, 40 responded to the question 
on the number of requests  filed, granted and denied. However, not all of them provided data for 
all elements of this question, for instance, the number of requests denied. Several countries and 
territories also reported that data is not collected or available centrally. This mirrors findings from 
2019, and also raises a question about data informing annual reports where these are published.
A few others made a disclaimer that the information provided is partial statistical data, which do not 
cover all public institutions mandated by the ATI law in the respective country.
With regard to disclosure and refusal of information , only a few responding countries and territories 
provided all data required.32 In some cases, some countries also reported that all requests received 
were disclosed, which raises questions about the accuracy of data, as there is usually a number of 
requests which are dismissed as they are incomplete or do not fall into an ATI request, or there are 
even a few requests carried over from the previous year or into the next year.
32 Australia, Brazil, Cayman Islands, Croatia, Ireland, Israel, Republic of Korea
4,794
2,121
6,158148619In terms of the average time to respond  to information requests, 74% of 51 responding countries 
and territories reported that information requests were responded between 1 to 30 days. The other 
8% reported that it takes between 31 to 60 days, and 2% reported more than 60 days. The rest 
indicated that data were not available. Further analysis would be needed on whether the responses 
are in accordance to the statutory time limit stipulated in their respective ATI legislation. From 19 out of the 62 countries and territories that responded to the question on reasons for non-
disclosure of information, the category of “Others” received the highest answer. This might indicate 
different categories used in some cases, which do not fall under those listed in the survey.33
National Security Privacy concerns Commercial confidentiality
Partial disclosure Non-disclosureOther
33 For example the documents requested were not in possession or do not exist (Jamaica) or the requests were vexatious (Brazil).FIGURE 5: Reasons for non-disclosure of information
FIGURE 6: Average time respond RTI requests1.15% 90.16% 2.58% 6.11% 2.52% 63.33% 13.36% 20.79%
74% 8% 2% 16%
1-30 days More than 60 days 31-60 days Data no available204. ATI reporting in the Voluntary National Reviews
As part of its follow-up and review mechanisms, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
encourages countries to “conduct regular and inclusive reviews of progress at the national and 
sub-national levels, which are country-led and country-driven” . These reviews, called Voluntary 
National Reviews (VNRs)34, are expected to serve as a basis for the regular reviews by the UN High-
level Political Forum (HLPF) on Sustainable Development, an annual meeting under the auspices of 
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).35
The VNRs are voluntary, state-led, conducted by both developed and developing countries, and 
involve a wide range of stakeholders, including civil society. The VNRs work to facilitate the sharing 
of experiences and to provide governments and other stakeholders with an opportunity to critically 
assess the country´s development patterns to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. The reviews also seek to strengthen policies and institutions of 
governments and to mobilise multi-stakeholder support and partnerships for the implementation of 
the SDGs.
In 2019 – for the first time since the 2030 Agenda’s adoption – SDG 16, among others, was subjected 
to a detailed review. During that year, 28 of the 47 countries submitting VNRs (59.5%) reported 
on ‘access to information’ . Of these 28 countries, 21 have a specific ATI law for public access to 
information.36
In 2020, 18 out of 47 VNR countries (38.3%) 
addressed ‘access to information’ in their reports. 
This might be seen as a decrease when compared 
to 2019, but it is worth noting that no specific SDG 
was specified for a detailed in review in 2020. Hence, 
the fact that ‘access to information’ was included by 
these countries in their reports demonstrates their 
recognition of the importance of ATI when it comes 
to reporting overall SDG progress.
Closely linked to this, the table below shows that although some countries have not yet adopted a 
specific ATI law for public access to information, they still reported progress on ATI in other contexts. 
Gambia, for example, reported that the draft constitution for ATI is in a process to be ratified, and 
included progress in relation to T arget 9.c on universal access to information and communication 
technology. Similarly, Micronesia also reported on ATI progress in relation to T arget 9.c. Cameroon 
saw the value of access to information in promoting social inclusion of vulnerable people.
34 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/vnrs/
35 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/hlpf
36 Powering sustainable development with access to information: highlights from the 2019 UNESCO monitoring and reporting 
of SDG indicator 16.10.2: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000369160?posInSet=2&queryId=6d5dfcc0-142b-46ec-
a3c9-6112fc055d6a
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS
UNITED NATIONS DEPARTMENT OF GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS
May 2020GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE SDG LOGO 
INCLUDING THE COLOUR WHEEL, AND 17 ICONS.VNRs are expected to serve 
as a basis for the regular 
reviews by the UN HLPF on 
Sustainable Development, 
an annual meeting under the 
auspices of ECOSOC.“2137 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018CountryYear of 
VNRsAdopted a 
specific ATI law 
for public access 
to informationReported on 
“Adoption of ATI 
guarantees”Reported on “ATI 
Implementation”
Algeria 2019 • •
Argentina 2020 • • •
Austria 2020 • • •
Azerbaijan 2019 • •
Bangladesh 2020 • • •
Bulgaria 2020 • •
Cameroon 2019    • *
Chad 2019 •
Chile 2019 • • •
Côte d'Ivoire 2019 • • •
Congo (Republic of the) 2019 •    • *
Croatia 2019 • • •
Ecuador 2020 • • •
Gambia 2020 • •
Ghana 2019 • •
Guyana 2019 • • •
Iceland 2019 • •
Indonesia 2019 • • •
Israel372019 • • •
Kenya 2020 • •
Kuwait 2019 •
Kyrgyzstan 2020 • •
Lesotho 2019 •    • *
Malawi 2020 • • •
Mauritius 2019    • *
Micronesia (Federated 
States of)2020 •    • *
Mongolia 2019 • •TABLE 4: UN Member States’ Reporting on “Access to Information” in the VNRs (2019-2020)22CountryYear of 
VNRsAdopted a 
specific ATI law 
for public access 
to informationReported on 
“Adoption of ATI 
guarantees”Reported on “ATI 
Implementation”
Morocco 2020 • • •
New Zealand 2019 • • •
North Macedonia 2020 • •
Palau 2019 • •
Panama 2020 •
Papua New Guinea 2020 • •
Peru 2020 •
Philippines 2019 • •
Republic of Moldova 2020 • •
Rwanda 2019 • •
Seychelles 2020 • • •
South Africa 2019 • • •
Timor-Leste 2019 • •    • *
Tunisia 2019 • •
Turkey 2019 • • •
United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland2019 • • •
United Republic of 
T anzania2019 • •
Vanuatu 2019 • • •
Zambia 2020 •
* The implementation aspect reported by these countries is more related to ‘access to media and ICT’, and other human-
rights issues, rather than ‘access to information held by public authorities’235. Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: 
Case studies
38 The RTA was established with support from the World Bank Group:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2013/12/17/a-regional-network-of-access-to-information-practitioners-in-latin-america
39 One institution from Spain and 16 from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, 
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Dominican Republic, Uruguay.
40 International and Ibero-American Foundation for Administration and Public Policies.
41 The World Bank and the Organization of American States
42 The project has been supported by EUROsociAL, the European Union Regional Programme for social cohesion in Latin America.
43 Adopted on that date by 22 ATI oversight bodies and two international organizations from 16 LAC countries.
44 As quoted from the of ficial document received by UNESCO from the RTA Secretariat.A. Latin America and the Caribbean: Regional actions for global goals
The Network for Transparency and Access to Information (R ed de 
Transparencia y Acceso a la Informacion , or RTA) was established in 
2011 in the wake of a growing ATI movement in the Latin America 
and the Caribbean (LAC) region.
Bringing together state agencies charged with implementing ATI legislation in their countries, RTA 
was formed in response to the demand expressed by several LAC countries to develop a consensus 
about the most effective mechanisms for using ATI to promote good governance and mitigate 
corruption.38 T oday, RTA has 32 member institutions belonging to 17 Latin American countries 
and Spain39, one international foundation40, a federal network of Argentina and two international 
organizations41.
Some of RTA’s joint actions have been realised through the “Transparency measurement project in 
Latin America and Spain” project42, built on the following three dimensions:
 1. Resources, which refers to indicators that measure the recognition and guarantee of the 
  right of access to information; 
 2. Processes, which refers to indicators that measure the level of inclusion and performance 
  of duties by the guarantor bodies and other entities that can fulfil transparency functions, 
  and 
 3. Results, which refers to indicators that measure results in the implementation of 
  transparency policies and the right of access to information.
The project also established best practices based on peer-to-peer learning such as a model for 
the international measurement of transparency; a model for document management and archives 
administration; a model for applying the gender approach to transparency and information access 
policies; and the version 2.0 of the Framework Law on Access to Information of the Organization of 
American States.
As part of its support to the SDGs, RTA adopted the declaration “Transparency and its Role in Latin 
American Region’s Democratic Life”  during its XVIII Assembly’s Meeting in Mexico City on 12 November 
201943, emphasizing the following44: 
 1. “That the guarantee of access to public information is an essential pillar in a democratic 
  State, which encourages social comptrollership, accountability, and the promotion of 
  citizen engagement to conduct a good governance.
24 2. That the access to public information is critical to attain the Sustainable Development 
  Goal 16 and that it strengthens the fulfilment of other Goals set in the UN 2030 Agenda.
 3. That the access to information oversight bodies’ work is vital in the democratic life of a 
  country, due to their role as a regulatory element and as a balance to the powers of the 
  State. 
 4. That is critical that the States have access to information guaranteeing and transparency-
  promoting bodies, provided with independence and resources that facilitate public   
  management opening, in order to strengthen citizen confidence in institutions. 
 5. That governments of the region are urged to support access to information and 
  transparency specialised bodies, and to consolidate public policies that may encourage  
  participatory democracy through the effective exercise of this right of citizens. ”
RTA has also been supportive of UNESO’s work on ATI, including in the development of UNESCO’s 
survey methodology for Indicator 16.10.2 and in mobilising its members to monitor ATI 
implementation through participating in the survey.
RTA could therefore serve as a model of formal regional cooperation among ATI oversight bodies, 
where capacities of the members are strengthened through synergised actions, contributing to 
improvements at the national level, while building trust, reducing disparities and increasing cohesion 
at the regional level – as aspired to by SDG T arget 17.16: Enhance the global partnership for 
sustainable development.
T arget 17.16: Enhance the global partnership for sustainable 
development
“Enhance the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, 
complemented by multi-stakeholder partnerships that mobilize and 
share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, to 
support the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in 
all countries, in particular developing countries. ”SDG 17: Partnerships for the Goals
“Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global 
partnership for sustainable development. ” 2545 Findings in this section are extracted from a study commissioned by UNESCO’s IPDC to independent researcher Ashwini 
Natesan with guidance and expert input by Sri Lanka RTI Commissioner Kishali Pinto-Jayawardena. For the purpose of this Report, 
only the most relevant findings are presented.  
46 “Legitimate information and the public interest override’ - critical analysis of selected decisions of the right to information 
commission during 2017-2019” by J. De A. Guneratne.
47 News reports gleaned from mainstream media reports, social media reports, videos, twitter and Facebook feeds. A total of 300 
stories were included in the analysis.
48 The CSOs that were included in the main analysis of this study were Centre for Policy Alternative, Outreach Unit; The Social 
Architects; Transparency International Sri Lanka; and Sri Lanka Press Institute.
49 The tabulations included overlaps, where the same requests/orders were listed under more than one SDG theme. Such overlaps 
aimed to ensure that any RTI requests were not arti ficially restricted to one SDG theme only.Sri Lanka’s Right to Information (RTI) Act, No. 12 of 2016, was enacted on 3 February 2017 to give 
effect to a constitutional right to information contained in Article 14A of the 19th Amendment to the 
Constitution of Sri Lanka. During the first three years of its implementation, the RTI Act has made 
inroads into rendering governance open and transparent, “significantly altering the relationship 
between the citizen and the State”46 and, to some extent, giving ways to increased transparency and 
accountability.
Within this context, a study was commissioned with the support of IPDC funds to analyse the use of 
the right to information vis-à-vis its impact on transparency and decrease of corruption in Sri Lanka, 
as well as how ATI contributes to the achievement of the SDGs in the country.
The study examined both the demand side (RTI requests filed by citizens and CSOs) and the supply 
side (responsiveness and attitude of public authorities and the Information Commission of Sri Lanka). 
It analysed data from publicly available sources47 and selected CSOs48, along with orders (decisions 
of appeals) from the Commission – all between 2017 and 2019.
Several findings can be noted from this study:
 B.1  Information related to SDG 16 is the most requested, underscoring the public’s call  
   for good governance
For the purpose of this study, data related to RTI requests were categorised according to the 
following SDG themes49:  
  •  Employment/ labour rights and welfare benefits                      ; 
  •  Infrastructure and construction            ;
  •  Public utility services                                 ;
  •  Land and agriculture                      ;
  •  Education            ;
  •  Health                                 ;
  •  Environment                                 ;
  •  Public procurement            ;
  •  Just, peaceful and inclusive society and institutional transparency            .B. Sri Lanka: Promoting transparency across SDGs through Access to  
 Information45
43ICONS
#1 NO POVERTY
RED
PMS:  185 C
C 1 M 100 Y 92 K 0
R 229 G 36 B 59
HEX:  e5243bCOLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
43ICONS
#1 NO POVERTY
RED
PMS:  185 C
C 1 M 100 Y 92 K 0
R 229 G 36 B 59
HEX:  e5243bCOLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
46ICONS
#4 QUALITY EDUCATION
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
DARK RED
PMS:  200 C
C 16 M 100 Y 86 K 7
R 197 G 25 B 45
HEX:  C5192D57ICONS
#15 LIFE ON LAND
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
LIME GREEN
PMS:  361 C
C 75 M 4 Y 100 K 0
R 86 G 192 B 43
HEX:  56C02B
57ICONS
#15 LIFE ON LAND
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
LIME GREEN
PMS:  361 C
C 75 M 4 Y 100 K 0
R 86 G 192 B 43
HEX:  56C02B56ICONS
#14 LIFE BELOW WATER
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
BLUE
PMS:  7461C
C 96 M 41 Y 6 K 0
R 10 G 151 B 217
HEX:  0A97D951ICONS
#9 INDUSTRY, INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
ORANGE
PMS:  1585 C
C 0 M 71 Y 98 K 0
R 253 G 105 B 37
HEX:  FD6925COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
51ICONS
#9 INDUSTRY, INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
ORANGE
PMS:  1585 C
C 0 M 71 Y 98 K 0
R 253 G 105 B 37
HEX:  FD6925COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS 54ICONS
#12 RESPONSIBLE CONSUMPTION & PRODUCTION
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
DARK MUSTARD
PMS:  131 C
C 18 M 48 Y 100 K 2
R 191 G 139 B 46
HEX:  BF8B2E
54ICONS
#12 RESPONSIBLE CONSUMPTION & PRODUCTION
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
DARK MUSTARD
PMS:  131 C
C 18 M 48 Y 100 K 2
R 191 G 139 B 46
HEX:  BF8B2E58ICONS
#16 PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG INSTITUTIONS
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
ROYAL BLUE
PMS:  7462 C
C 100 M 71 Y 22 K 5
R 0 G 104 B 157
HEX:  00689D48ICONS
#6 CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
BRIGHT BLUE
PMS:  638 C
C 82 M 7 Y 9 K 0
R 38 G 189 B 226
HEX:  26BDE2
48ICONS
#6 CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
BRIGHT BLUE
PMS:  638 C
C 82 M 7 Y 9 K 0
R 38 G 189 B 226
HEX:  26BDE255ICONS
#13 CLIMATE ACTION
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
DARK GREEN
PMS:  7742 C
C 74 M 32 Y 95 K 19
R 63 G 126 B 68
HEX:  3F7E4445ICONS
#3 GOOD HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
KELLY GREEN
PMS:  7739 C
C 81 M 15 Y 100 K 2
R 76 G 159 B 56
HEX:  4C9F3844ICONS
#2 ZERO HUNGER
COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS
MUSTARD
PMS:  7555 C
C 18 M 37 Y 100 K 1
R 221 G 166 B 58
HEX:  DDA63A50ICONS
#8 DECENT WORK AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
BURGUNDY RED
PMS:  1955 C
C 29 M 100 Y 70 K 27
R 162 G 25 B 66
HEX:  A21942COLOUR & BLACK/WHITEICONS26The study found that the majority of RTI requests fall under the category of “Just, peaceful and 
inclusive society and institutional transparency” (1,475), followed with “Employment/ labour 
rights and welfare benefits” (1,199) and “Infrastructure and construction” (851).
According to the study, CSOs and citizens have used the RTI Act to inquire into varied issues 
such as payments under the Samurdhi Poverty Alleviation Programme, construction of 
roads, progress and finances surrounding various development projects in their respective 
areas. There are also cases of the use of RTI on issues of larger public interest like budgetary 
allocations, and assets declaration concerning ministers.
B.2  A positive trend of information release can be seen in all the SDG themes
From the publicly available data, 
for example, it can be inferred that 
the majority of cases – 77% – have 
resulted in disclosure of information.
Data from the Information Commission echoed this 
trend, with information releases being granted in 85% 
of the Commission’s orders. This figure comprised 77% 
of full release and 8% partial release.
Meanwhile, data from CSOs showed an average of 51% of information disclosure 
across all SDG themes. This trend, however, might increase since the figure did not 
include requests that were still being processed at the time the study was conducted.11991475
13158 105204698
365851Employment/ labour rights and welfare benefits                      
Infrastructure and construction
Public utility services
Land and agriculture
Education
Health
Environment
Public procurement
Just, peaceful and inclusive society and 
institutionaltransparency
FIGURE 7: Number of RTI requests in per SDG themes
Information 
Received
77%Information 
Not Received
8%Partly Received
3%No Response
2%Issue Resolved
10%
FIGURE 8:
Disclosure of Information 
- Publicly available data
FIGURE 9:
Disclosure of Information – 
Orders from the Information 
Commissioner of Sri LankaInformation Received 
and Received in part
85%Information Rejected
2%2750 For instance, the data from The Social Architects showed that in six provinces, 871 women filed RTI requests when compared to 
570 men. The Women’s Development Centre, Kandy, a CSO focused on the development of women, also revealed that women’s 
group had filed most requests in public utility services concerning issues like broken electric bulbs, fixing distribution of letters, bus 
fares, public transportation facilities etc.B.3  Public authorities at provincial and district levels tend to be more responsive
Data from the CSOs revealed that the average percentage of information release made by 
public authorities at provincial level is 54%, followed with 52% at the district level, and 45% at 
the central level. Additionally, data from the Information Commission showed that most appeals 
were made against public authorities at the central level (783 appeals). As a comparison, 259 
appeals were filed against public authorities at the province level and 142 at the district level.
B.4  The role of an independent Information Commission is central in developing an RTI  
  regime
The establishment of the Information Commission of Sri Lanka, as the substantive body 
advocating for standards and best practices, has  increased transparency. Of 84% of its 1,177 
orders, the Commission has ruled in favour of disclosure of information, with 74% being 
granted fully. It is worth noting that public authorities have complied with the Commission’s 
orders. In the 16% of appeals that were rejected (including partially), most were decided on 
the basis of statutory exemptions as per the RTI Act (45%), while the rest were on grounds 
that information requested was not in possession of the public authorities (42%) and due to 
procedural irregularities (13%).
Using Access to Information for gender empowerment in Sri Lanka
The study in Sri Lanka also found that in certain districts, women RTI 
applicants outnumbered the men.50 There is also some empirical evidence 
as to how women played an activist role in many areas, including in the east 
and north of Sri Lanka. 
In a particularly striking example, rural women organised in the area of Kilinochchi in the 
Northern Province to consistently file RTI requests to the local hospital asking about the 
insufficiency of trained medical personnel in the hospital despite financial allocations. This led 
to the quality of health care being improved. In another case, a community of women from the 
North used the RTI Act to challenge the building of telecommunication towers on their land 
and succeeded in halting the process. Meanwhile, in Ratmalyaya area of Puttalam, a water-pipe 
project was initiated to supply water. Although the pipes had been laid, no water supply was 
provided. A women’s welfare association requested information as to the reason for the delay in 
supplying water. Although there has been no reported progress to date on this effort, the case 
demonstrates women’s interest in exercising their fundamental right to information.28Overall learnings from the Sri Lanka Study
From the above key findings, the study concluded that the RTI regime has cultivated a culture 
of pro-transparency in Sri Lanka . Information disclosure has not only led to the mere release of 
information but has also shaped the public’s attitude in asserting accountability in governance. The 
CSOs, whose role also facilitated citizens to file RTI requests, have acknowledged that development 
projects have become more transparent and corrupt practices have reduced due to the RTI Act . 
ATI has therefore become a form of activism that deepens democratic participation, transparency, 
accountability and combating corruption. Working towards achieving the SDGs and monitoring 
country progress  on that basis has also supported and encouraged pro-transparency advocates in 
their efforts of ensuring more transparency and sustainable development.
Finally, the study confirmed that consorted action needs to be taken at both demand side and supply 
side for there to be impact on transparency and corruption, as showed in Figure 10 below.
51 Figure adapted from “Transparency in delivery of entitlements through empowered Civil Society Organizations (CSOs): The 
Consortium of Groups for Combating Corruption (CGCC) model in Rajasthan, India” , in Field Actions Science Reports [Online], 
Special Issue 11 - 2014 http://journals.openedition.org/factsreports/3551Transparency / Accountability/ Decreased corruption
Enhanced civic engagementCivil Society Organizations
Motivate and assist citizens in filing RTI 
requests, as well as provide moral supportEffective policy formation
Establish local 
resource centres
Generate 
awarenessEmpower 
womenCreate an enabling 
environment at 
grassroots levelPolicy makersEffective resolution of appeals
Institutional measuresSUPPL Y SIDE
DEMAND SIDE
FIGURE 10: Linkages between the use of RTI and increased transparency/reduced transparency51296. Conclusion
Reporting on SDG 16.10.2 serves as an incentive for countries to improve their legal regulatory 
frameworks, and/or their administration of ATI. In this regard, UNESCO’s survey on SDG 16.10.2, 
which provides a standardised approach to monitoring ATI performance, has proven useful for 
countries in measuring ATI progress at national level.
The survey findings in this report suggest that having a specialised ATI oversight and appeals body is 
fundamental to ensure ATI law enforcement. Experience around the world shows that these bodies 
play key roles in advocating for standards and best practices, as well as helping to address problems 
in ATI implementation.
The survey also points to good record-keeping as being is vital for ATI oversight and appeals bodies. 
Without adequate and reliable records of the requests and appeals received and how they are 
processed, it is difficult to produce evidence and measure progress. This is a challenge requiring 
political will, management and resources. Good evidence-based reporting can provide many 
advantages for improving ATI. It can also help ATI bodies in negotiating for financial and technical 
resources with policymakers and other stakeholders, which in turn would help address the problems 
related to management and limited resources.
Emerging from the 2020 research process, it is 
evident that sustainable ATI monitoring and reporting 
requires ATI oversight bodies, when they are the data 
holder, to play a proactive role in collecting relevant 
SDG data and cooperating closely with national-level 
SDG monitoring bodies in this regard.
Civil society organizations and regional and 
international cooperation networks – such as 
the International Conference of Information 
Commissioners (ICIC), the International Ombudsman 
Institute (IOI); the Open Government Partnership 
(OGP), and the Regional Network of Access to 
Information Practitioners in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (Red de Transparencia y Acceso a la 
Informacion, RTA) – have proven to play a significant 
role in accelerating both the adoption and the 
implementation of ATI guarantees.
As 2020 has also shown, national and international celebrations can be used as platforms to exercise 
such multi-stakeholder collaboration on ATI, for example during the International Day for Universal 
Access to Information (28 September). The website for the day  highlighted six webinars and a high 
level online event organised by UNESCO headquarters, and more than 20 national and regional 
events around the world. International Anti-Corruption Day (9 December) each year is another 
opportunity to flag the importance of ATI and the monitoring thereof.UNESCO’s survey on 
SDG 16.10.2, which 
provides a standardised 
approach to monitoring 
ATI performance, 
has proven useful for 
countries in measuring 
ATI progress at national 
level.“SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS
UNITED NATIONS DEPARTMENT OF GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS
May 2020GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE SDG LOGO 
INCLUDING THE COLOUR WHEEL, AND 17 ICONS.
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
GOALS
UNITED NATIONS DEPARTMENT OF GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS
May 2020GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF THE SDG LOGO 
INCLUDING THE COLOUR WHEEL, AND 17 ICONS.307. Decision
IPDC Council Decision on the Monitoring and Reporting of Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG) indicator 16.10.2 (Access to Information) adopted on 26 November 2020
The Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC:
Recalling  the relevance of the Decision on Monitoring SDG indicator 16.10.2 (access to information) 
adopted by the 31st session of the Intergovernmental Council of the IPDC which encourages the 
Secretariat “to develop a mechanism that could involve and support UNESCO Member States in 
data-collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access to information”;
Welcoming  the 2020 UNESCO Report on the Monitoring and Reporting of SDG indicator 16.10.2 
(Access to Information), and recognizing its synergies with the International Day for Universal Access 
to Information and its utility in providing evidence-based analysis for the improvement of access to 
information as a factor for sustainable development;
Thanking  those Member States that provided information on their national progress on access to 
information through responding to UNESCO´s 2020 Survey on SDG indicator 16.10.2, noting the 
positive developments reported therein; and encouraging additional measures to address identified 
gaps;
Acknowledging  that the data generated by UNESCO, as custodian agency of Indicator 16.10.2, has 
led to the upgrading of the indicator from Tier II to Tier I status indicator, and encouraging continued 
annual contributions to the global monitoring by the UN Secretary General.
Appreciating  those Voluntary National Reports (VNRs) which have included analysis based on 
Indicator 16.10.2, among other data for assessing progress;
Welcoming  the IPDC Bureau’s decisions to support projects aiming at strengthening capacity 
at national levels to monitor and report on SDG indicator 16.10.2 as part of measuring progress 
towards SDG 16, therefore:
1. Encourages  Member States to enhance legal regulatory frameworks on access to information 
at the national level as well as the effective implementation of these frameworks, as part of 
their commitments to advance the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda;312. Further encourages  Member States  to  continue monitoring  and  reporting  progress  
on  SDG indicator  16.10.2  through  forthcoming  Voluntary National Reviews and through 
responding to UNESCO’s annual survey, and to engage - where applicable - the oversight 
bodies responsible for access to information in the collection of data;
3. Invites  the IPDC Bureau to continue supporting grass-roots projects that will help Member 
States in data-collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access to information, 
including strengthening monitoring and reporting capacities of oversight bodies responsible 
for access to information;
4. Requests  the IPDC Secretariat:
a. to further strengthen collaboration with other UN agencies, civil society organizations, 
networks of oversight bodies responsible for access to information, intergovernmental 
bodies, and other concerned stakeholders in advocacy, capacity building and awareness 
raising efforts on Indicator 16.10.2; 
b. to continue publishing a biennial report on worldwide progress towards SDG indicator 
16.10.2, with a view to giving visibility to national efforts to monitor and report on 
access to information, to contributing data to the International Day for Universal Access 
to Information, and to further sensitizing relevant  stakeholders on  the crosscutting 
significance of access  to information in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals;
c. to report to the IPDC Bureau in 2021 and to the Council in 2022 about the progress 
made on the above.introduction 1.0In setting out graphical guidelines on the use the UNESCO Logo Block 
across a full range of applications in the Logo Toolkit, we hope to achieve two 
objectives:
to enable the Secretariat and the National Commissions to use • 
theUNESCO visual identity correctly;
to help the Secretariat and the National Commissions to ensure the • 
correct application of graphic modalities when authorizing the use of the 
UNESCO brand.
The Logo Toolkit, however, does not specify the roles and responsibilities 
of the Governing Bodies, the Secretariat or the Member States. These are 
set out in the ‘Directives Concerning the Use of the Name, Acronym, Logo 
and Internet Domain Names of UNESCO’ (Resolution 34C/86), relevant 
administrative rules and regulations, and related guidelines elaborated for 
this purpose.
The toolkit consists of six sections:
Section 1 introduces the Logo Block and its key components.
Section 2 elaborates on the main principles for constructing the Logo Block.
Section 3 explains how the Logo Block should feature on specific 
applications.
Sections 4 & 5 use concrete examples to illustrate how these guidelines 
should be put into practice in a wide range of branding and co-branding 
situations. Section 4 presents cases of ‘statutory use’ by the governing 
bodies, the Secretariat as well as the National Commissions and Permanent 
Delegations. Section 5 gives examples of ‘authorized use’ for all those 
entities that require specific permission to make use of the UNESCO brand.
Section 6, a technical note concerning the use of electronic files provided by 
UNESCO.
Section 7, the Index, aims to provide a quick cross reference to the 
information contained in the toolkit.联合国教育、
科学及文化组织ﻣﻨﻈﻤﺔ ﺍﻷﻣﻢ ﺍﻟﻤﺘﺤﺪﺓ
ﻟﻠﺘﺮﺑﻴﺔ ﻭﺍﻟﻌﻠﻢ ﻭﺍﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔΟрганизация
Οбъединенньιх Ηаций по
вопросам образования,
науки и культурыOrganizaci ón
de las Naciones Unidas
para la Educación,
la Ciencia y la CulturaOrganisation
des Nations Unies
pour l’éducation,
la science et la cultureUnited Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural OrganizationCommunication and
Information Sector
Supported by:Access to information (ATI) is critical for the achievement of 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Through access to 
information, the public is empowered to make informed choices, 
to effectively monitor and hold their government to account, and 
to be able to know about decisions affecting their lives.
As the UN agency with the specific mandate to promote “the free 
flow of ideas by word and image” , UNESCO has been designated 
by the UN General Assembly as the custodian agency for tracking 
global progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 on public access to 
information.
This report provides an analysis of the subject matter, taking 
stock of the global progress on the adoption and implementation 
of legal guarantees on Access to Information, based on key 
findings from UNESCO’s 2020 Survey on Indicator 16.10.2 and 
other ongoing initiatives in the area.
Findings presented in this report demonstrates the significance 
of access to information not only in achieving Goal 16 on 
Peace, Justice and Inclusive Societies, but also in advancing the 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
as a whole.SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELO PMENT 
GOALS
9789231 004216