Muriel Poisson Open School Data: What Planners Need to Know IIEP-UNESCO
Open School Data:  
What Planners  
Need to Know
Ethics and Corruption in EducationMuriel PoissonParis 2021 UNESCO: International Institute for Educational PlanningOpen School Data:  
What Planners  
Need to Know
Ethics and Corruption in EducationMuriel PoissonThe designations employed and the presentation of 
material in the maps in this publication do not imply 
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the 
part of the IIEP-UNESCO or UNESCO concerning the 
legal status of any country, territory, city or area or 
of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of 
its frontiers or boundaries. 
This publication is available in Open Access under 
the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 
IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publica-
tion, the users accept to be bound by the terms of 
use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://
www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-
en). The present licence applies exclusively to the 
text content of the publication.
Published by:
International Institute for Educational Planning 
7–9 rue Eugène Delacroix, 75116 Paris
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.org
ISBN: 978-92-803-1446-5
Cover photo: IIEP and Shutterstock
Typesetting: Regent Typesetting
© UNESCO 2021Ethics and Corruption in Education3 iiep.unesco.org
Presentation of the Series: 
Ethics and Corruption in 
Education
Studies conducted over the last two decades have empha-
sized the negative impact of corruption on the economic, 
social, and political development of countries. Corruption in-
creases transaction costs, reduces the efficiency of public 
services, distorts the decision-making process, and under -
mines social values. Moreover, corruption tends to contribute 
to the reinforcement of inequities by placing a disproportion-
ate economic burden on the poor and limiting their access 
to public services. For this reason, fighting corruption has 
become a major concern for policy-makers and actors in-
volved in improving public administration.
A review of the literature highlights a number of global and 
sectoral attempts to tackle the issue of corruption. However, 
it appears that the education sector has not received ad-
equate attention from national education authorities and 
donors, despite numerous grounds for prioritizing the chal -
lenge of combating corruption in education:
 —Public sector reforms aimed at improving governance and 
limiting corruption-related phenomena cannot produce 
significant results unless adequate attention is paid to the 
education sector, as in most countries this constitutes the 
largest or second-largest public sector in both human and 
financial terms.
 —Any attempt to ‘ensure inclusive and quality educa-
tion for all and promote lifelong learning’ (Sustainable 
Development Goal 4) will be undermined if problems relat -
ed to corruption are not properly addressed. Such issues Ethics and Corruption in Education4 iiep.unesco.org
Presentation of the Series
have severe implications for the efficient use of resources 
and quality of education and school performance.
 —Lack of integrity and unethical behaviour within the edu -
cation sector are inconsistent with one of the primary aims 
of education –  to produce ‘good citizens’ respectful of the 
law, human rights, and equity. They are also incompatible 
with any strategy that considers education as a principal 
means of fighting corruption.
In this context, in 2001 the UNESCO International Institute 
for Educational Planning (IIEP-UNESCO) launched a com-
prehensive research and capacity development programme 
entitled ‘Ethics and Corruption in Education’. Corruption is 
here defined as the systematic use of public office for private 
benefit which results in a reduction in the quality or availabil -
ity of public goods and services. The main objective of this 
programme is to improve decision-making and the manage -
ment of education systems by integrating transparency and 
anti-corruption concerns into methodologies of planning and 
administration of education.
The programme includes publications on topics such as for -
mula funding of schools; decentralization and corruption; 
transparency in pro-poor education incentives; the adverse 
effects of private supplementary tutoring; the design and 
effective use of teacher codes of conduct; transparency in 
textbook management; and academic integrity. It also in-
cludes tools to help countries develop methodologies for 
assessing corruption in education, such as public expenditure 
tracking surveys or integrity assessments. More recently, it 
has paid specific attention to public access to information in 
education, with two new research projects devoted to open 
school data and open government in education.Ethics and Corruption in Education5 iiep.unesco.org
Presentation of the Series
All related resources are available on ETICO (http://etico.iiep.
unesco.org), a dynamic clearing-house for all information and 
activities related to transparency and accountability issues in 
education.
Jacques Hallak, Former IIEP-UNESCO Director, and  
Muriel Poisson, IIEP-UNESCO Programme SpecialistEthics and Corruption in Education6 iiep.unesco.org
Contents
Tables, figures, boxes, and maps  8
Abbreviations  12
Executive summary  14
Introduction 17
1. What is meant by open school data? 24
1.1.  Defining open school data 24
1.2.  Identifying major factors contributing to 
open data development 29
1.3.  Distinguishing between management, 
participation, and mixed approaches  40
1.4.  Considering differences between regions  48
2. How to choose the content and format for open 
school data 54
2.1.  Selecting the data to be shared with the public  54
2.2.  Mobilizing various sources of data 61
2.3.  Favouring relevant data comparisons  70
2.4.  Envisaging a wide range of formats for data 
presentation 75
3. How to plan for equal access to and efficient use 
of open school data 86
3.1.  Who needs open school data and for what  
purposes? 86
3.2.  Prioritizing the most relevant data for users  94
3.3.  Ensuring equal access for all to data 99
3.4.  Building the capacities of stakeholders in 
using school data 104
3.5.  Monitoring outcomes and impacts of open 
school data 107Ethics and Corruption in Education7 iiep.unesco.org
Contents
4. How to link open school data and accountability  115
4.1.  Understanding various accountability models  115
4.2.  Formulating a theory of change  121
4.3.  Incorporating corruption concerns from the outset 134
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks? 147
5.1.  Over-simplification of complex issues  147
5.2.  Misinterpretations and distrust of data 149
5.3.  School competition and possible stigmatization 151
5.4.  ‘Empowering the empowered’  155
5.5.  Power imbalance, tensions, and frustrations  158
5.6.  Data privacy and tracking of individuals  161
5.7 .  Security issues in fragile contexts  164
6. Practical guidelines for designing and 
implementing open school data initiatives  169
References  181
Glossary of terms  186
Appendices  189
Appendix 1. Experiences in open school data 
initiatives worldwide  189
Appendix 2. Content of U-DISE school report 
cards in India 194
Appendix 3. Complaint handling procedures for 
Cek Sekolahku in Indonesia 198Ethics and Corruption in Education8 iiep.unesco.org
Tables, figures, boxes, and maps
Tables
Table 1.  Chronology of adoption of selected open 
school data initiatives in different regions  30
Table 2.  Major factors contributing to open data 
development 40
Table 3.  Comparison of the management, 
participation, and mixed approaches  47
Table 4.  Main categories of publicized school data 59
Table 5.  Mapping data beneficiaries and reviewing 
their possible motivations  88
Table 6.  Data beneficiaries and identified 
purposes of information 90
Table 7 .  Parents’ assessment of the importance 
of publishing school data in Australia, 
Indonesia, Pakistan, and the Philippines  94
Table 8.  Percentage of parents who declared open 
school data to be ‘most useful’  96
Table 9.  List of possible training topics by 
stakeholder 106
Table 10.  Expected outcomes from open school 
data initiatives  111
Table 11.  Three major domains of accountability 
affected by open school data 117
Table 12.  Four major drivers that link open school 
data and accountability  122
Table 13.  Main characteristics and advantages and 
disadvantages of each accountability 
model studied 136
Table 14.  Proportion of parents who reported 
using open school data to exert pressure 
on education or school authorities (by 
category of action) 144Ethics and Corruption in Education9 iiep.unesco.org
Tables, figures, boxes, and maps
Figures
Figure 1.  Major actors and steps involved in the 
management approach 42
Figure 2.  Major steps involved in the participation 
approach 44
Figure 3.  Major steps involved in the mixed approach 46
Figure 4.  Which communication options offer 
greater data accessibility? 84
Figure 5.  Means used by parents to access Cek 
Sekolahku and Sekolah Kita in Indonesia 101
Figure 6.  Snapshots of open school data impacts  113
Figure 7 .  Major steps involved in the planning of 
open school data initiatives  114
Figure 8.  Horizontal and vertical accountability 
within education systems  115
Figure 9.  Parents’ reasons for selecting schools in 
Bangladesh (percentage; multiple response) 126
Figure 10.  Percentage of parents emphasizing the 
usability of different categories of data to 
fight corruption in Bangladesh 135
Boxes
Box 1.  Methodology used for   
the six IIEP-UNESCO case studies  
on open school data  21
Box 2.  Selected terms associated with school 
report cards  29
Box 3.  Exponential increase of data in the world  33
Box 4.  The right to access information held by 
public bodies  35
Box 5.  Long versus short routes of accountability  37Ethics and Corruption in Education10 iiep.unesco.org
Tables, figures, boxes, and maps
Box 6.  New Public Sector Management 39
Box 7 .  Illustration of the management-oriented 
approach: PMIU in Pakistan 42
Box 8.  Illustration of the participation-oriented 
approach: TIB school report cards in 
Bangladesh 44
Box 9.  Illustration of a mixed approach:  
School report cards in Ghana 46
Box 10.  Digitalization and synchronization of data: 
Learning from the experience of the PMIU 
in Pakistan 63
Box 11.  School self-evaluation: Learning from the 
experience of EDU-Q Card in Peru 65
Box 12.  A focus on school stakeholder issues:  
Learning from the experience of the 
Philippines  66
Box 13. Verification and validation of data: 
Learning from the experience of Sekolah 
Kita in Indonesia 69
Box 14.  Conducting fair school comparisons:  
Learning from ICSEA 72
Box 15.  Design of heat maps to track school 
progress over time in Punjab, Pakistan 74
Box 16.  Limits to online databases: The example  
of PMIU in Punjab, Pakistan 81
Box 17 .  Stakeholder interest in the publication of 
school data in the Philippines  89
Box 18.  The role of ‘cultural brokers’ in the  
Cek Sekolahku project, Indonesia 103
Box 19.  Monitoring of teacher and parent 
accountability through Indonesian school 
report cards  119Ethics and Corruption in Education11 iiep.unesco.org
Tables, figures, boxes, and maps
Box 20.  School performance during the  
Day of Excellence in Colombia 120
Box 21.  School excellence reports and  
awards in Colombia 130
Box 22.  Open school data: Communication 
or accountability? 143
Box 23.  Complaint mechanisms under Mejora tu 
Escuela in Mexico  145
Box 24.  ACARA’s communication strategy for  
the release of school data 154
Box 25.  Ethnic-based statistics in France  157
Box 26.  Politicization of relationships at school 
level in Bangladesh 159
Box 27 .  Explaining the concept of personally 
identifiable information 162
Box 28.  Examples of data that should not be 
disclosed 164
Maps
Map 1.  Countries covered by IIEP-UNESCO’s 
international research on open school data 22
Map 2.  Selected open school data initiatives in 
Africa 49
Map 3.  Selected open school data initiatives in Asia 51
Map 4.  Selected open school data initiatives in 
Latin America 53Ethics and Corruption in Education12 iiep.unesco.org
Abbreviations
ACARA  Australian Curriculum Assessment and 
Reporting Authority
AFD  Agence française de développement
AGEMAD  Amélioration de la gestion de l’éducation 
à Madagascar (Improving Education 
Management in Madagascar)
AGEPA  Amélioration de la gestion dans les pays 
africains (Improving Education Management 
in African countries Improving Education 
Management in African Countries
ANSA Affiliated Network for Social Accountability
ASER  Annual Status of Education Report
BANBEIS Bangladesh Bureau of Educational 
Information and Statistics
BOS  Bantuan Operasional Sekolah (School 
Operational Assistance Fund)
CMS  CheckMySchool
CVA  Citizen Voice and Action
DISE  District Information System for Education
DPE Directorate of Primary Education
DepEd Department of Education
EMIS  Educational management information system
ENLACE Evaluación Nacional de Logro Académico en 
Centro Escolares (National Assessment of 
Schools’ Academic Performance)
FOI Freedom of information
GPE Global Partnership for Education
ICFES Instituto de Evaluación
ICSEA Index of Community Socio-Educational 
Advantage
IIEP-UNESCO  UNESCO International Institute for 
Educational Planning
IMCO  Instituto Mexico para la CompetitividadEthics and Corruption in Education13 iiep.unesco.org
Abbreviations
INSPIRE School Performance Improvement, Review and 
Engagement
LITE  Leadership Initiative for Transformation and 
Empowerment
MEA  Monitoring and evaluation assistant
NGO  Non-governmental organization
NIEPA National Institute of Educational Planning and 
Administration
NPM  New Public Management
NTA  National Taxpayers Association
PDSPK Centre for Statistical Data of Education and 
Culture (Indonesia)
PEC Primary Education Certificate
PII Personally identifiable information
PITB Punjab Information Technology Board
PMIU Programme Monitoring and Implementation Unit
PTA  Parent–teacher association
RTI Right to information
SMC  School management committee
SNIE  Sistema Nacional de Indicadores Educativos 
(National System of Educational Indicators)
SSIM  Supporting School Improvement
TB Transparency board
TI Transparency International
TIB Transparency International Bangladesh
TII Transparency International Indonesia
U-DISE Unified District Information System for 
Education
UEO  Upazila Education Officer
UGEL Unidades de Gestión Educativa Local
UNICEF  United Nations Children’s Fund 
USAID  US Agency for International Development
WB World BankEthics and Corruption in Education14 iiep.unesco.org
Executive summary
The number of countries providing the general public with 
access to educational data has grown rapidly over the past 
decade, encouraged by new opportunities offered by infor -
mation technologies and growing pressure from citizens 
for more transparency. A wide variety of initiatives have 
flourished accordingly, consisting of the publication of 
school-level information in the form of school report cards 
either in paper or electronic format –  the school level being 
key to encouraging citizens to make best use of and act 
upon the information provided.
In some countries, governments have taken the lead in 
disseminating such data, relying on existing education-
al management information systems (EMIS). Elsewhere, 
civil society organizations have shown the way, placing the 
 emphasis on community engagement. Open school data tend 
to become more comprehensive over time, with the inclusion 
of data on school inputs and school processes, as well as 
a growing number of school outputs. However, there is still 
much to learn about how to make open school data more 
useful as a tool to hold education stakeholders accountable 
for quality education for all, and to reduce malpractice.
In this context, this publication has been prepared to help 
 decision-makers as well as educational planners and 
man  agers make informed decisions regarding access to 
practical, effective, and usable open school data. It argues 
that edu cation authorities have much to learn from the ex -
perience of civil society in the area, emphasizing the need 
to shift from an administrative approach to a more citizen-  
centred perspective.Ethics and Corruption in Education15 iiep.unesco.org
Executive summary
Building on the research conducted by IIEP-UNESCO in 
Africa, Asia, Australia, and Latin America, it draws lessons 
from more than 50 countries which have experimented with 
innovative  approaches to increasing the usefulness of open 
school data and strengthening their impacts on transparency 
and account  ability. More specifically, it builds on the results 
of six in-depth case studies carried out by IIEP-UNESCO in 
Australia, Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan (Punjab), 
and the Philippines, Each of these studies compared gov -
ernment-led and citizen-led initiatives, and surveyed 250 
school-level actors.
This publication consists of five major sections which re -
spond to key questions that decision-makers, educational 
planners, and managers need to address when designing 
open school data policies.
It starts with a definition of open school data, which is un-
derstood to mean all information about school inputs, 
processes, and/or outputs shared with the general public, 
either in paper or electronic format. After reviewing the 
main  factors that lead to the growth of open school data, it 
explains the distinction between management-oriented and 
 participation-oriented approaches.
The publication presents the various categories of data 
that can be considered for sharing, namely school profiles, 
funding, condition of services, school governance and op -
eration, efficiency and performance, and parent and pupil 
 satisfaction. It then proceeds to describe successful ap -
proaches for presenting and disseminating data, paying 
particular attention to approaches and contexts most likely Ethics and Corruption in Education16 iiep.unesco.org
Executive summary
to encourage communities to make active use of open school 
data, such as mothers’ gatherings.
Recognizing the need to close the accountability loop, the 
publication analyses four major drivers that can help link 
open school data and accountability, emphasizing the rel -
evance of the ‘collaborative planning imperative’ and user 
partici  pation models. It then reviews the various actions 
required for formulating and supporting open school data 
initiatives from a user perspective, and describes a planning 
cycle that leads towards well-identified impacts (e.g. im-
proved quality of EMIS information, better school planning, 
or empowered communities).
Finally, the publication alerts decision-makers and  planners 
to a variety of risks associated with the introduction of 
open school data initiatives:  over-simplification of com-
plex issues, misinterpretation of data, school competition 
and  stigmatization, elite capture, power imbalances, data 
 privacy, and security issues in fragile contexts. For each of 
those risks, the book lists possible mitigation measures.
The last section presents practical guidelines on how to 
design and implement open school data policies, review -
ing key points to ensure their impact and success. These 
are structured around seven steps: design a clear open data 
policy framework; prioritize critical data with potential to 
generate positive change; set up robust information man-
agement systems; explore attractive ways to present data; 
make sure that data are accessible to all; strengthen stake -
holder capacities to act on information; and support efforts 
to improve accountability and fight corruption. For each of 
those, tips and suggestions for further action are provided.Ethics and Corruption in Education17 iiep.unesco.org
Introduction
The current state of open school data initiatives
The number of countries providing the general public with 
access to educational data has grown rapidly over the past 
decade, encouraged by novel opportunities offered by new 
 information technologies and the development of the inter net. 
A wide variety of initiatives have been developed specifically 
to share school-level information in the form of school report 
cards –  the school level being key to encourage citizens to 
make best use and act upon the information provided. In some 
countries, governments have taken the lead in disseminating 
such data, relying on existing educational management infor -
mation systems (EMIS). Elsewhere, civil society organizations 
have taken the initiative to produce school report cards1 for 
selected schools, placing the emphasis on community en -
gagement. In many cases, both types of initiative co-exist.
School report cards provide key information about a school, in-
cluding school funding, student enrolment, teacher  numbers 
and qualifications, pupil/teacher ratios, conditions of school 
facilities, textbook availability, and student achievement. 
They are perceived as a powerful tool to enable citizens to 
exercise social control over the management of public re -
sources, to stand up for their rights, and to hold schools 
accountable. Accordingly, strong expectations are placed on 
their development. But while school report cards are becom-
ing increasingly common in all regions of the world, no real 
assessment has been made of which data are most effec -
tive in encouraging citizen action, and how best to publicize 
them to ensure impact. In addition, dialogue on those issues 
1 Paper or electronic medium by which information about school inputs, processes, or outputs 
is presented.Ethics and Corruption in Education18 iiep.unesco.org
Introduction
between education sector managers and civil society organi-
zations remains extremely limited.
This book has been prepared to help raise awareness among 
decision-makers, as well as educational planners and man-
agers, of the importance of school report cards. The aim is 
also to share lessons drawn from the experience of a variety 
of countries which have experimented with innovative ap -
proaches to increasing the usefulness of open school data 
and their impact on transparency and accountability issues. 
Finally, the publication lays out the adequate safeguards that 
need to be put in place to ensure that all users benefit equally 
from open data initiatives, and that the latter do not result in 
elite capture of information. This is particularly relevant and 
timely, given the rapid growth in the amount of school data 
and the number of countries adopting school report cards.
What questions do open school data raise for planners?
More specifically, this publication intends to unpack the 
chain of actions necessary to develop open school data 
success fully, exploring questions related to design and imple -
mentation processes and answering basic questions related 
to the use of open school data by decision-makers, educa-
tional planners, and managers. These questions include the 
following:
 —What kind of enabling legal framework can support the 
development of open school data initiatives?
 —Which data are most suitable for promoting accountability 
while simultaneously monitoring corrupt practices?
 —What format is most likely to encourage communities to 
make better use of open school data?Ethics and Corruption in Education19 iiep.unesco.org
Introduction
 —What approach most effectively facilitates the active par -
ticipation and engagement of the general public and their 
proper use of data?
 —What can be done to ensure that the data provided bene -
fit more than a small proportion of the population, and 
allow the entire education community to make informed 
decisions?
 —What actions following the publication of school data have 
the greatest impact on issues related to transparency and 
accountability?
 —What are the potential adverse effects of access to infor -
mation both on education systems and on individuals?
What are the main objectives of this publication?
The main objective of this publication is to help decision- 
makers and educational managers in charge of access to 
information make informed decisions about access to practi-
cal, effective, and usable open school data, so as to promote 
transparency and empower citizens to fight against corrup -
tion. Moreover, it aims to encourage them to learn from the 
experience of civil society representatives in this respect, and 
to collaborate with them accordingly.
Building on IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data
This publication builds on the results of the research con -
ducted by the UNESCO International Institute for Educational 
Planning (IIEP-UNESCO) on ‘Using open school data to 
 improve transparency and accountability in education’, which 
was carried out between 2016 and 2019. The main objective 
of this research was to compare the motivations,  purposes, 
 audiences, data sources, contents, uses, and impacts of Ethics and Corruption in Education20 iiep.unesco.org
Introduction
school report cards developed in different regions of the 
world. Specifically, the publication draws on the following 
products of the research:
 —A review of the literature combined with a more in-depth 
analysis of 14 open school data initiatives implemented in 
different regions of the world (Cheng and Moses, 2016).
 —A regional state-of-the-art paper on open school data in 
sub-Saharan Africa, reviewing 21 initiatives in 13 coun-
tries, accompanied by a more in-depth analysis of seven 
of these programmes (Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen, 
2019).
 —A regional state-of-the-art paper on open school data in 
Latin America, studying school indicators shared with the 
public in 15 countries, and detailing the main characteris -
tics of seven of those (Brito, 2019).
 —Six case studies on open school data projects carried 
out in the following countries: Australia, Bangladesh, 
India, Indonesia, Pakistan (Punjab), and the Philippines. 
Each of the case studies compares a government-led 
and citizen-led initiative, based on a survey of some 250 
school-level actors (Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018; Felicia, 
2018; Khan, 2018; Parafina, 2018; Rabinowitz, 2018; Roy 
and Miah, 2018).Ethics and Corruption in Education21 iiep.unesco.org
Introduction
Methodology used for the six IIEP-UNESCO  
case studies on open school data 
The preparation of each IIEP-UNESCO case study included:
 —a series of semi-structured interviews with key infor -
mants, i.e. individuals responsible for implementation 
of the right to information legislation, education sector 
managers, actors from civil society organizations in-
volved in the empowerment of citizens through public 
access to data, members of parents’ associations, and 
media representatives;
 —a survey of 250 school-level actors, using a multi-stage 
stratified sample method to illustrate the diversity of 
 perspectives and perceptions about the usefulness 
of open school data, taking into consideration socio- 
economic, educational, and geographical factors. Infor -
mants in cluded head teachers, teachers, parent–teacher 
associations, parents, and community leaders.
Each case study investigates and compares the types of 
information published, as well as those responsible for its 
publication and how it is accessed; the most critical data for 
improving transparency and accountability; how the public 
accesses and utilizes the information; the conditions re -
quired to positively impact transparency and accountability 
in the education system; and the limits of such processes.
Altogether, more than 60 initiatives carried out in about 50 
countries have been scrutinized as part of IIEP-UNESCO’s 
 research on open school data (see Map 1 ).BOX 1Ethics and Corruption in Education22 iiep.unesco.org
Introduction
Map 1. Countries covered by IIEP-UNESCO’s international research on open 
school data
Note: The final boundary between the Republic of Sudan and the Republic of South 
Sudan has not yet been determined. The final status of the Abyei area is not yet de -
termined.  The dotted line represents approximately the Line of Control in Jammu and 
Kashmir agreed upon by India and Pakistan. The final status of Jammu and Kashmir has 
not yet been agreed upon by the parties. 
Source: IIEP based in UN Cartographic Division
In addition, this publication capitalizes on the main con-
clu sions of two major events organized as part of the same 
IIEP-UNESCO research programme:
 —a study visit to Sydney and Canberra during October 2016, 
convened with the Australian Curriculum Assessment and 
Reporting Authority (ACARA), to learn from the My School  
experience, which brought together national teams from 
seven countries in the Asia Pacific region;
 —an international policy forum organized in collaboration 
with the Philippines Department of Education, and held 
in Manila from 24 to 26 January 2018, which gathered 
together national policy-makers, civil society representa-
tives, and researchers from 15 countries around the world.Ethics and Corruption in Education23 iiep.unesco.org
Introduction
How is this book structured?
This publication consists of six major sections, five of which 
examine the following basic questions that decision- makers, 
educational planners, and managers will have to address 
when initiating open school data policies:
1. What is meant by open school data?
2. How to choose the content and format for open school data
3. How to plan for equal access to and efficient use of open school data
4. How to link open school data and accountability
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
6. Practical guidelines for open school data initiatives
Each section presents lessons learned from international 
experience, using the results of IIEP-UNESCO’s research to 
provide a snapshot of a country case as an illustration of best 
practice, and drawing lessons for educational planners and 
managers on this basis.
The publication ends with practical guidelines on how to 
design and implement open school data policies, reviewing 
key points to bear in mind to ensure greater impact and suc -
cess of such policies.Ethics and Corruption in Education24 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school 
data?
1.1. Defining open school data
General definition
‘Opening school data’ refers to the action of sharing with 
the general public school-level information, either in paper or 
electronic format. Such data are mostly quantitative, but are 
sometimes also qualitative, and can be used to help monitor 
the services provided by the school, hold school and edu -
cation authorities accountable, and support their actions to 
achieve inclusive and equitable quality education for all in a 
collaborative manner. To be useful, they should be compre -
hensive, relevant, accurate, accessible, and timely.
Open school data usually take the form of school report 
cards , which aggregate education data at the school level, 
and are generated either by government authorities or civil 
society organizations.
A wide variety of data can be displayed within this framework, 
related to school inputs (e.g. funding), processes (e.g.   teacher 
attendance), or outputs (e.g. student achievement), and are 
usually presented in statistical form. However, they can also 
include more qualitative information about the school or its 
management (e.g. community participation).
Even though a variety of education data can also be shared at 
other administrative levels (e.g. districts, provinces, national), 
open school data are regarded as essential to encouraging 
citizens to act upon information, as schools are at the front-
line of service delivery and are thus of immediate relevance 
and interest for users.Ethics and Corruption in Education25 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Open school data displayed on a ‘transparency board’ in a Filipino school
Source: Parafina, 2018.
Basic principles
School data can be considered ‘open’ if they are made public 
in a manner that complies with a series of basic principles, 
which are also applicable in other public sectors, and are usu-
ally determined by existing national legislation (Brito, 2019). 
Such principles can be summarized as follows:
 —Primary . Data are primary data collected at the level of 
the school that have not been modified or aggregated with 
other data.
 —Accurate . Data shared with the public are submitted to a 
rigorous collection process, which is subject to controls.
 —Comprehensive. Displayed data characterize the dimen -
sions they relate to in a comprehensive, detailed manner. Ethics and Corruption in Education26 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Their technical specifications are provided or available 
upon request.
 —Accessible. Data are available to all without restrictions or 
need for registration. No one should be privileged or dis -
criminated against in accessing them.
 —Free . Data can be accessed without charge. No one should 
be asked to pay for access or required to offer any kind of 
service in exchange.
 —Timely . Data are updated regularly and posted periodic -
ally to protect both their value and usability.
 —Freedom of use. Data can be used freely for a variety of 
reasons (e.g. information, management, control, and analy -
sis). They can be applied and reproduced through different 
formats.
Two other principles may be put forward: comparability  (data 
are comparable over time and across schools) and inter-
operability  (data are readable and usable under different 
systems). However, in the case of the education sector, such 
principles can apply to government-led initiatives but not 
necessarily to those led by civil society organizations.2
Open school data vs EMIS
The notion of open school data should be distinguished from 
that of educational management and information systems 
(EMIS), which are defined as a ‘system for the collection, inte -
gration, processing, maintenance and dissemination of data 
and information to support decision-making, policy-analysis 
2 Consult the principles of the international open data charter at: https://opendatacharter.net/
principles/Ethics and Corruption in Education27 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
and formulation, planning, monitoring and management at all 
levels of an education system’ (UNESCO, 2008):
 —Data included in EMIS are aggregated to provide indi-
cators for all levels of the system, especially district, 
regional, and national levels, while open school data focus 
on the school level only.
 —Open school data do not cover all the dimensions  included 
in EMIS; they are much more selective and give priority to 
data considered as the most relevant and actionable for 
the general public.
 —In most cases, open school data contain data included in 
EMIS, but this is not necessarily the case. Other indicators 
formulated locally can be added, especially in the case of 
civil society-led initiatives.
 —Open school data target the general public,  especially 
school stakeholders (i.e. school principals, teachers, school 
management committee [SMC] members, parents, and 
pupils), while EMIS target education authorities as their 
main users.
 —Open school data aim to facilitate planning and manage -
ment at the school level by engaging with front-line users, 
while EMIS aim to provide education authorities with the 
information needed for planning and management at 
higher administrative levels.
School report cards and other associated terms
The term school report card is often associated with open 
school data, as it is the medium through which open school 
data are shared with the general public. School report cards 
can thus be defined as the paper or electronic medium by 
which information about school inputs, processes, or outputs Ethics and Corruption in Education28 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
is presented. In sub-Saharan Africa, the term ‘school profiles’ 
is also used, while in Latin America cuadros de indicadores de 
las escuelas  (tables of school indicators) is preferred. In all 
cases, school report cards should not be confused with stu-
dent report cards, which detail student grades.
“   I’m confused about the terminology they use. I 
think of students’ grades when I hear of report 
cards. 
A parent in the Philippines (Parafina, 2018)
In some cases, school report cards are intended for inter -
nal use only by the school administration and/or education 
 authorities; in other cases, they are made public as part of an 
open data policy for external use by the school community, 
and more broadly by all citizens.
Several other terms are associated with school report cards, 
especially when these are developed by communities and/
or civil society organizations using participatory  approaches 
(see the short glossary of terms provided below in Box 2 ). This 
is the case for community scorecards, which summarize sub -
jective assessments of public service users regarding inputs, 
processes, and outputs, collected through a  participatory 
process involving schools and communities. The way the 
 information is presented also leads to different terms: in 
the case of school scorecards, for instance, school scores 
are presented through a numerical or letter scale based on 
a list of predetermined criteria selected to represent school 
 performance or progress.Ethics and Corruption in Education29 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Selected terms associated  
with school report cards
Citizen report card: Summary of the results of a public 
service user satisfaction survey, intended to provide in-
formation for authorities and communities on service 
availability, delivery, and efficiency.
Community scorecard: Collated subjective assessments of 
public service users regarding inputs, processes, and out -
puts, collected through a participatory process.
School-education index: Composite score based on  several 
indicators for each school, enabling users to compare 
schools and assess how a school evolves over time.
School scorecards: School scores presented through 
a numerical or letter scale, based on a list of predeter -
mined criteria selected to represent school performance or 
progress. 
Report cards can also exist at levels other than the school. 
Existing examples include school cluster report cards, dis -
trict report cards, and regional/provincial report cards for 
internal or external use.
1.2. Identifying major factors contributing to open data 
development
The development of school report cards is not recent, and 
dates back to the 1990s (Table 1). Parafina (2018) notes that 
they ‘were used as early as the 1990s’ in the Philippines, and 
refers to a publication by Bautista (2005) that traces them BOX 2Ethics and Corruption in Education30 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
‘back to the Department [of Education]’s 10-year master plan 
on decentralization, which covered the years 1995 to 2005’. 
Most initiatives, though, whether government-, donor-, or 
civil  -society-driven, started between 2000 and the present, 
with a large concentration of cases between 2005 and 2015.
Table 1. Chronology of adoption of selected open school data initiatives 
in different regions
Starting 
dateCountry Name of the 
initiativeInitiator
1997 United States Virginia School 
Report CardState 
2000 Bangladesh Citizen Report Card 
SurveyTransparency 
International 
Bangladesh (TIB)
2003 Madagascar School Report 
Card (Improving 
Education 
Management in 
African Countries 
[AGEPA])World Bank (WB), 
Agence française 
de développement 
(AFD), United Nations 
Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF)
2004 Ghana School Report Card Government, US Agency 
for International 
Development (USAID), 
WB
2005 India School Report Card 
(District Information 
System for 
Education [DISE])Federal government, 
National Institute of 
Educational Planning 
and Administration 
(NIEPA), UNICEF
2005 Mexico School Report Card Federal government
2007 Brazil Basic Education 
Development IndexFederal governmentEthics and Corruption in Education31 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Starting 
dateCountry Name of the 
initiativeInitiator
2008 Uganda Citizen Voice 
and Action (CVA) 
Community Score 
CardCVA
2009 Nigeria Citizen Report Card Leadership Initiative 
for Transformation and 
Empowerment (LITE)
2009 Philippines School Report Card Government
2010 Australia My School Federal government
2010 Philippines CheckMySchool Affiliated Network for 
Social Accountability 
(ANSA)
2012 Malawi School Report 
FeedbackLink
2013 Guatemala Ficha escolar Government 
2013 Mexico Mejora tu Escuela Instituto Mexico para la 
Competitividad (IMCO)
2013 Pakistan School Report Card Government, 
Programme Monitoring 
and Implementation 
Unit (PMIU), WB
2013 Rwanda Community Score 
CardTransparency 
International (TI) 
Rwanda
2013 Tanzania Primary 
School Leaving 
Examination (PSLE) 
School RankingGovernment 
2014 Indonesia Cek Sekolahku Transparency 
International IndonesiaI 
(TII)Ethics and Corruption in Education32 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Starting 
dateCountry Name of the 
initiativeInitiator
2015 Colombia School Excellence 
ReportGovernment and 
Instituto de Evaluación 
(ICFES)
2015 Indonesia Sekolah Kita Federal government
2015 Peru Semáforo Escuela Government 
2018 Peru EDU-Q Card Edukans
A wide variety of factors can explain the multiplication of 
 initiatives over the last 15 years, some of which are not specif -
ic to the education sector and need to be placed in the wider 
context of public sector evolution. Four main sets of factors 
can be identified within this framework, namely: the data 
revolution; the demand for more democracy and  citizen in-
volvement; the accountability and anti-corruption agenda; and 
the focus on public sector evaluation and  performance. These 
are described in more detail in the following sub-sections.
The data revolution
According to a 2014 report, prepared at the request of the 
United Nations Secretary-General, the data revolution is 
characterized by ‘the explosion in the volume of data, the 
speed with which data are produced, the number of produc -
ers of data, the dissemination of data, and the range of things 
on which there is data, coming from new technologies such 
as mobile phones and the “Internet of Things”, and from other 
sources, such as qualitative data, citizen-generated data 
and perceptions data’ (Data Revolution Group, 2014). At the 
same time, the percentage of the world population using the 
internet has increased from less than 1 per cent in 1993 to Ethics and Corruption in Education33 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
49.7 per cent in 2017 (World Bank data).3 The  digital divide 
remains and has never been as huge, with the proportion of 
internet users  varying from 16 per cent for low-income coun-
tries to 85 per cent for high- income countries. However, the 
range of new opportunities offered by the data revolution and 
the internet is undeniable.
Exponential increase of data in the world 
The volume of data in the world is increasing exponential -
ly: one estimate has it that 90% of the data in the world has 
been created in the last two years. … The volumes of both 
traditional sources of data (represented by the number of 
household surveys registered) and new sources (mobile 
subscriptions per 100 people) have been rising, and open -
ness is increasing (numbers of surveys placed online). 
Thanks to new technologies, the volume, level of detail, and 
speed of data available on societies, the economy and the 
environment, is without precedent.
Source: Data Revolution Group, 2014.
Such evolution is noticeable in the education sector. 
Benefiting from the development of new technologies, EMIS 
have grown exponentially, thanks to the increased capacity 
to collect, manage, and produce a wealth of data over a much 
shorter period of time. In the case of India, for instance, the 
District Information System for Education (DISE), which was 
launched in 1995 in 42 districts from seven states,  extended its 
3 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT .NET .USER.ZSBOX 3Ethics and Corruption in Education34 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
 coverage from primary to secondary level, and to other states 
in 2001, then to all Indian districts in 2005/06. By 2015/16, the 
Unified District Information System for Education (U-DISE) 
covered a total of 1,522,346 schools (Bordoloi and Kapoor, 
2018). The capacity to share this information, especially via 
the internet, also increased over the same period, raising 
the question of sharing with the public at least part of the 
information collected through EMIS. This was illustrated by 
the launch of school report cards by government authorities 
in India (2005), Mexico (2005), Philippines (2005), Australia 
(2010), Guatemala (2013), and Colombia (2013).
Access to information and citizen voices
A growing number of countries have adopted freedom of 
 information (FOI) or right to information (RTI) laws, following 
the recognition of the fundamental right of freedom of ex -
pression (see Box 4 ). As estimated by UNESCO, the number of 
countries adopting such laws has increased from 13 in 1990 
to over 90 today. Such laws rely on the ‘fundamental premise 
that all information held by governments and governmental 
institutions is in principle public and may only be withheld if 
there are legitimate reasons, such as typically privacy and 
security, for not disclosing it’ (UNESCO, 2020). This recogni-
tion of the right to information has to be viewed in the wider 
context of contemporary societies’ democratization: citizens 
should not only be given access to information previously 
held by public bodies, their voice should be heard and their 
participation in public affairs sought more actively.Ethics and Corruption in Education35 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
The right to access information  
held by public bodies 
Freedom of Information, or the right to information, can be 
defined as the right to access information held by public 
bodies. It is an integral part of the fundamental right of free -
dom of expression, as recognized by Resolution 59 of the 
UN General Assembly adopted in 1946, and Article 19 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948).
It has also been enshrined as a corollary of the basic human 
right of freedom of expression in other major international 
instruments, including the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights (1966) and the American Convention on 
Human Rights (1969).
FOI legislation reflects the fundamental premise that all 
information held by governments and governmental insti-
tutions is in principle public and may only be withheld if 
there are legitimate reasons, such as privacy and  security, 
for non-disclosure. Over the past 10 years, the right to 
 information has been recognized by an increasing number of 
countries, including developing ones, through the  adoption 
of a wave of FOI laws.
Source : UNESCO, 2020. 
This had, in turn, an influence on the education sector, com-
pelling educational authorities to increase the amount 
of information that they share with the public, and to find 
new ways to promote public participation. The movement 
towards decentralization and school-based management BOX 4Ethics and Corruption in Education36 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
 exemplifies this idea of bringing decision-making closer to 
users, and of involving communities in school functioning. In 
such a context, school report cards are key tools not only to 
bring information to the direct attention of all school actors, 
but also to foster participatory approaches at the school 
level. Their promoters assume, indeed, that the importance 
given by parents to education (in a context of increased liter -
acy) will encourage them to access all available data related 
to their children’s schooling, and to be more willing to par -
ticipate in related decisions accordingly.
Accountability and anti-corruption agenda
The 2004 World Development Report has theorized the import -
ance of a ‘short route’ versus a ‘long route’ of accountability 
(see Box 5 ), especially in poor contexts. In the case of the 
short route, citizens find themselves in a direct relationship 
with front-line service providers (e.g. schools in the education 
sector). Regarding the long route, ‘there is no direct account -
ability of the provider to the consumer’ (World Bank, 2003): 
citizens can only influence decision-makers through their 
votes, and in turn decision-makers can influence service pro -
viders. According to the same report, the most vulnerable 
individuals encounter multiple obstacles to having their voice 
heard when the route to accountability is longer; hence the 
need to favour a shorter route by promoting social account -
ability at the level of front-line service delivery.Ethics and Corruption in Education37 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Long versus short routes of accountability 
In the case of services such as health, education, water, 
electricity, and sanitation, there is no direct accountability 
of the provider to the consumer. Why not? For various good 
reasons, society has decided that the service will be pro -
vided not through a market transaction, but through the 
government taking responsibility. That is, through the ‘long 
route’ of accountability, whereby clients as citizens influ-
ence policymakers, and policymakers influence providers.
When the relationships along this long route break down, 
service delivery fails (absentee teachers, leaking water 
pipes) and human development outcomes are poor … Given 
the difficulties in strengthening the long route of account -
ability, improving the short route –  the client -provider 
relationship –  deserves more consideration.
Source : World Bank, 2003.
For this to happen, access to school data is essential: ‘Access 
to information for the public at large is indispensable for build-
ing participation, ownership and social control. As a result, 
those closest to the point of delivery –  the school –  must be 
sufficiently well informed not only to be able to detect fraud, 
but also to claim what they are entitled to receive’ (Hallak and 
Poisson, 2007). In this context, open school data appears as 
a powerful tool to promote citizen control over the transfer 
and use of financial, material, and human resources; to hold 
local and school authorities to account; to tackle weaknesses 
in service delivery; to detect potential  malpractice at school 
level; and, finally, to allow citizens to stand up for their rights.BOX 5Ethics and Corruption in Education38 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Data-driven decision-making and culture of evaluation
Performance-based management was initially introduced in 
the business sector and has been applied to the public sector 
since the 1970s, building on the concept and techniques of New 
Public Sector Management (see Box  6). It consists of  regularly 
assessing the performance of an organization by  monitoring 
its progress against a set of objectives and  measurable 
 targets, with a view to improving its efficiency and results. It 
has encouraged the production of a variety of data by public 
administrations to enable performance monitoring to take 
place. Performance-based management builds on the idea of 
‘data-  driven decision-making’, according to which  decisions 
should be taken using factual evidence and data. In this con -
text, the development of school performance monitoring in 
the early 1980s in the United States (Figlio and Kenny, 2009) 
was structured by two main objectives: first, to promote ed -
ucation quality by focusing on outputs rather than inputs; 
second, to urge schools to deliver better results by holding 
them accountable for learning. This movement involved the 
multiplication of assessments at all levels of education sys -
tems, including the international level.4 Brito (2018) describes 
how, over the past 30 years, almost all Latin American coun-
tries have made considerable efforts to evaluate different 
dimensions of their education systems down to the school 
level, and to design standardized instruments to assess stu-
dent learning. School report cards can be seen as a product 
of such evolution, by giving the opportunity not only to educa-
tion authorities but also to citizens to compare the results of 
a given school with national standards and/or other schools, 
and to hold schools accountable on this basis.
4 See cross-national learning assessments such as LaNA, PASEC, PILNA, PIRLS, PISA, 
SACMEQ, SEA-PLM, TERCE, or TIMSS (UNESCO-UIS, 2018).Ethics and Corruption in Education39 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
New Public Sector Management
Over the last 20 years or so, public sector organizations 
have borrowed management practices from the private 
sector. The argument of doing more with less, which inspired 
New Public Management (NPM) reforms, introduced to the 
public sector the need for the explicit use of standards 
and performance measures (Hood, 1991). Governments of 
Western countries started to place greater emphasis on 
output control, reward systems, and results, rather than 
overlooking compliance with administrative rules and pro -
cedures. NPM-oriented reforms provided public managers 
with these new tools for achieving performance. However, 
the  specific complexity of the public sector necessitates 
framing perform  ance and adapting management tools and 
methods to such environmental aspects, as well as imple -
menting these techniques by balancing different values 
within organizations.
Source : Vignieri, 2018.BOX 6Ethics and Corruption in Education40 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
The four factors mentioned in this sub-section are sum-
marized in Table 2 .
Table 2. Major factors contributing to open data development
The data revolution Access to information and 
citizen voice
Increase in the volume, speed, and 
dissemination of data
Enlarged access to the internet
Building of comprehensive EMIS 
databasesRight to information laws
Decentralization of public 
management
Demand for citizen participation
Accountability and anti-corruption 
agendaData-driven decision-making and 
culture of evaluation
Holding public authorities 
accountable for the service 
provided
Identification of bottlenecks and 
malpractice
Development of social 
accountability approaches using 
informationEvidence-based decision-making
Focus on public service quality
Production of multiple datasets to 
monitor system performance and 
results
1.3. Distinguishing between management, participation, 
and mixed approaches
Open school data initiatives can serve a variety of purposes, 
and follow three main approaches: a management-oriented 
approach, a participation-oriented approach, and a mixed 
approach.Ethics and Corruption in Education41 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Management-oriented approach
Initiated by central public authorities, management-  oriented 
 approaches aim to improve school management by sharing 
school report cards with local authorities and school actors, in 
order to help them identify major bottlenecks, formulate school 
improvement plans, orient budgetary processes, and monitor pro-
gress and results –  particularly in contexts of decentralization. 
Management-oriented approaches are often used in con-
texts of decentralization or school-based management 
policies. Based on the concept of results-based manage -
ment, they aim to use data to identify schools with high and 
low results, distributing funds using sanction and reward 
principles, and creating incentives for local and school 
actors to improve school performance on this basis. School 
authorities are requested to develop their own school im-
provement plans using the datasets provided (particularly 
those related to student learning). However, as described 
by Brito (2018), such data usually remain with local and 
school authorities, even when made public either by cen-
tral authorities (via the internet) or school authorities (on a 
public board). They usually do not reach end users, with the 
exception of those participating in SMCs, due to a lack of 
participatory approaches.Ethics and Corruption in Education42 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Figure 1. Major actors and steps involved in the management approach
SchoolsMinistry of 
EducationLocal education 
authorities
Communities 5 542
31
Note : The arrows show flows of information. The numbers indicate the chronology of 
transmission.
Illustration of the management-oriented 
approach: PMIU in Pakistan
One of the most significant steps taken by the provincial 
government in improving accountability and transparen -
cy in the education landscape was the development of the 
Programme Monitoring and Implementation Unit (PMIU). 
This open data initiative publishes online the monthly per -
formance of almost 53,000 public schools in Punjab across 
specific educational indicators (e.g.  student attendance, 
teacher presence, and school facilities). The collected in-
formation is evaluated by pre-district committees, district 
review committees, and CEO [chief executive officer] confer -
ences every month in order to monitor progress and identify 
where further work is needed. Stocktaking  meetings held 
with the chief minister every two months ensure that each 
district is answerable for its performance; top performers 
are praised and poor performers are subject to sanctions.
Source : Khan, 2018.BOX 7Ethics and Corruption in Education43 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Participation-oriented approach
Usually initiated by civil society organizations, participation-  
oriented approaches aim to increase the engagement and 
empowerment of communities by giving them access to school 
data. The idea is to encourage them to act upon this information 
by voicing their concerns, and in some cases employing social 
monitoring to hold schools and/or local authorities accountable.
Participation-oriented approaches are often designed by 
civil society organizations in contexts of poor service delivery 
at school level, and pervasive corrupt practices (e.g. collec -
tion of illegal fees, high rates of teacher absenteeism). They 
aim to open short routes of accountability within the edu-
cational system by instituting direct feedback mechanisms 
between users and front-line providers. The data shared with 
users can be extracted from existing EMIS systems, but also 
produced by communities themselves. The idea is to share 
these data with all school stakeholders to enable discussion 
and  monitoring of school results, to detect bottlenecks and 
possible malpractice, and to facilitate demands for better 
edu cation services on this basis. It is expected that com-
munity mobilization and civic monitoring will lead schools 
and local public authorities to address shortcomings, with 
con sequent improvements in school performance.Ethics and Corruption in Education44 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Figure 2. Major steps involved in the participation approach
Civil society
Schools and/or 
local authorities321
Communities
Illustration of the participation-oriented 
approach: TIB school report cards in Bangladesh
Transparency International Bangladesh (TIB) initially pro -
vided education-related information to people through 
an advice and information centre set up through a Com-
mittee of Concerned Citizens. Then, in 2004, TIB launched 
information-  dissemination activities in selected  primary 
schools through parent and mother gatherings, advice and 
information desks, information boards, and leaflets, in order 
to create awareness among parents and the wider com-
munity about educational issues. In 2006, TIB con ducted a 
Citizen Report Card Survey in selected primary schools and 
shared the findings with school-level stakeholders, including 
 parents, the SMC, the media, and school authorities.
Source: Roy and Miah, 2018.BOX 8Ethics and Corruption in Education45 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Mixed approaches
Initiated by public authorities, mixed approaches  combine the 
management-oriented approach, described above, with  specific 
measures aimed at generating community participation and 
 involvement at school level.
Mixed approaches are quite similar to  management-  oriented 
approaches, insofar as they are developed by public  authorities 
with a view to improving school performance by  allowing 
for better monitoring of their results. However, mixed 
 approaches also draw lessons from the limited impact of 
management-oriented approaches due to lack of empower -
ment of school actors, and instead build on the experience of 
participation-oriented approaches by introducing com munity 
participation mechanisms at school level. In other terms, 
open school data are used by local public  authorities to 
 monitor school results and encourage better school planning, 
but they are also used to collect community feedback and 
create mobilization at the school level. However, the  capacity 
of  education authorities to foster user engagement may not 
be as strong as seen in participation-oriented  approaches 
 facilitated by civil society actors.Ethics and Corruption in Education46 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Figure 3. Major steps involved in the mixed approach
SchoolsMinistry of 
EducationLocal education 
authorities
Communities5
542
31
6
Illustration of a mixed approach:  
School report cards in Ghana
Several initiatives take a mixed approach by seeking to 
combine improved management with community partici-
pation. For example, the School Report Card Implementation 
Manual in Ghana highlights two main uses of the tool. At 
the district level, it is used to improve reporting to the cen -
tral ministry, while at the school level, where school report 
cards are discussed at the school performance appraisal 
meeting, it is used to draw up a school performance im-
provement plan. This school review is designed to help 
the school and key stakeholders in the community, with a 
strong interest in the school’s welfare, take note of perform-
ance and identify strengths and successes, together with 
areas for improvement.
Source : Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen, 2019.BOX 9Ethics and Corruption in Education47 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Table 3 summarizes the motivations, major aims, audience, 
and promoters of those three approaches.
Table 3. Comparison of the management, participation, and mixed approaches
Approach Motivation Aims Audience Promoters
Management-
oriented 
approach 
(top-down 
feedback)Decentralization
Results-based  
management
Pressure 
from learning 
assessments Support 
school 
planning
Improve 
educational 
quality
Increase 
school 
performance
Sanction and 
rewardLocal 
authorities
School 
authorities
SMCsMinistry of 
Education
Participation-
oriented 
approach 
(bottom-up 
feedback)Short route of 
accountability 
(direct feedback 
mechanisms)
Civic monitoring 
and social 
accountabilityAllow 
communities 
to monitor 
and discuss 
school 
results
Support 
demand 
for better 
education 
services
Hold schools 
and public 
authorities 
accountableParents and 
communities
School 
authorities
Local 
authoritiesCivil society 
organizations
Mixed 
approachCombination of 
the aboveCombination 
of the aboveCombination 
of the aboveMinistry of 
EducationEthics and Corruption in Education48 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
1.4. Considering differences between regions
Open school data initiatives have flourished in all regions of 
the world. Some date back to the 1990s, such as the Virginia 
School Report Card introduced in the state of Virginia 
(United States) in 1997 . Appendix  1 lists selected initiatives 
 scrutinized as part of IIEP-UNESCO’s research, led by gov -
ernment  authorities as well as civil society organizations. The 
following sub-sections highlight regional differences.
Focus on Africa
Map 2 shows selected African countries where open school 
data initiatives have been developed since the early 2000s. 
In all the projects under review, international partners played 
a key role. Government-led initiatives were introduced at the 
initiative of development partners (e.g.  Agence française 
de développement [AFD], United Nations Children’s Fund 
[UNICEF], US Agency for International Development [USAID], 
World Bank [WB]), involving international funding and often 
outside operators, while civil society programmes were run 
by international or national non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) using international funding (e.g. Link).
Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen (2019) state that the first 
 recorded programme was initiated in 2000 in Namibia, as 
part of the Basic Education Support project funded by USAID. 
They analyse how the management-oriented approach was 
encouraged in other countries in the region in the follow -
ing years: ‘The management-oriented approach grew out of 
development of sectoral approaches and associated fund-
ing. These “results-based” approaches amplified the need 
for information to measure outcomes. At the same time, theEthics and Corruption in Education49 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Map 2. Selected open school data initiatives in Africa
Note: The final boundary between the Republic of Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan 
has not yet been determined. The final status of the Abyei area is not yet determined.  
Source: IIEP based in UN Cartographic Division.
prospect of significant funding being injected into educa-
tion systems through the Fast-Track Initiative made  efficient 
resource management more of a concern.’ It led to the 
launch of the Improving Education Management in African 
Countries (AGEPA) programme in five African countries in 
2003, under which school report cards were designed at 
the central level by education ministry officials, with techni -
cal support  received from international partners. In the case 
of Madagascar, a first attempt was made to present results 
in a more accessible way, so as to encourage community in-
volvement. Building on the same premises, Data Must Speak, 
a new programme co-funded by the Global Partnership for 
Education (GPE), the Hewlett Foundation, and UNICEF, was 
initiated in 2014 in Madagascar, Togo, and Zambia.Ethics and Corruption in Education50 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
During the same period, a wide variety of community score -
card experiments relying on citizen participation were 
carried out in countries such as Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, 
Malawi, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda. They were usual -
ly smaller in size –  ranging from coverage of 10 schools (the 
initiative led by Transparency International [TI] Rwanda) up 
to 340 schools (the Link Community Development Malawi 
project). Those types of initiative also benefited from de -
velopment  assistance by partners and technical support. 
Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen (2019) emphasize that ‘their 
durability seems on the whole to be limited, with very little 
formalization (even partial)’. 
Focus on Asia
Major open school data initiatives have spread widely in Asia 
over the last two decades. Federal governments of highly 
populated countries began sharing school data  extracted 
from their EMIS systems as early as 2005 in the case of 
India, followed by Bangladesh in 2010, and Indonesia in 2015. 
In the case of Indonesia, for instance, Sekolah Kita (‘Our 
School’) was developed by the Centre for Data and Statistics 
of Education and Culture, which forms part of the Ministry of 
Education and Culture. It displays data on 215,697 schools, 
including kindergartens, primary schools, lower secondary 
schools, and upper secondary schools (Felicia, 2018). The 
Philippines and Australia followed a similar path in 2009 
and 2010 respectively. In all these countries, open school 
data were institutionalized at the country level by central 
public authorities.Ethics and Corruption in Education51 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Map 3. Selected open school data initiatives in Asia
Note: The dotted line represents approximately the Line of Control in Jammu and 
Kashmir agreed upon by India and Pakistan. The final status of Jammu and Kashmir has 
not yet been agreed upon by the parties. 
Source: IIEP based in UN Cartographic Division.
Over the same period, civil society organizations were also 
very active in developing community or citizen report cards, 
through the use of participatory approaches. Transparency 
International Bangladesh (TIB) was among the first to de -
velop a methodology to design school report cards in 105 
government, 40 non-government, 14 satellite, and 12 com-
munity primary schools spread over eight Upazilas5 (Karim, 
Santizo Rodall, and Cabrero Mendoza, 2004). Transparency 
5 I.e. districts.Ethics and Corruption in Education52 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
International Indonesia (TII) developed a similar approach 
under Cek Sekolahku. And the Affiliated Network for Social 
Accountability (ANSA) started CheckMySchool (CMS) in 
the Philippines in 2010. In all those cases, school report 
cards were designed as key tools to improve transparency, 
hold schools accountable for the service provided, and fight 
against corrupt practices.
Focus on Latin America
In Latin America, government authorities in Brazil, Colombia, 
Guatemala, Mexico, and Peru have taken the lead in sharing 
school data with the general public, placing an emphasis on 
student results. Brito (2019) explains this situation in terms of 
the development of ‘a strong culture of evaluation to  improve 
the quality of education’, which has led most countries in the 
region to design standardized assessment instruments to 
measure student learning outcomes. She also highlights the 
difficulties encountered in those countries with reconciling 
data produced by a variety of public agencies, each of which 
operates using a different logic and adopting a  specific 
format, making it difficult to use and compare data over time.
This centralized approach to open school data has opened 
up the space for a few civil society organizations to propose 
more participatory models to share school information and 
involve communities. This is the case of the project Mejora 
tu Escuela in Mexico, which relies on an online platform, with 
the possibility for parents to provide comments or make com-
plaints. Another such example is found in Peru, with Edu-Q 
card, which helps communities to identify weaknesses and 
formulate a plan of improvement to address them.Ethics and Corruption in Education53 iiep.unesco.org
1. What is meant by open school data?
Map 4. Selected open school data initiatives in Latin America
Source: IIEP based in UN Cartographic Division.Ethics and Corruption in Education54 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and 
format for open school data
2.1. Selecting the data to be shared with the public
The number and types of information published under open 
school data initiatives can vary significantly. Both tend to 
become more comprehensive over time, starting with data on 
school inputs and thereafter encompassing data on school 
processes and school outputs. Data usually belong to one of 
six categories:
 —school profile;
 —funding;
 —condition of services;
 —school governance and operation;
 —efficiency and performance;
 —parent and pupil satisfaction.
School profile
Open school data consist of 
background information about 
each school, start ing with 
the name and some  times the 
physical address. Sekolah Kita 
(Indonesia) goes further, dis -
playing geo  spatial information, 
in cluding educational and cul -
tural sites around the school. 
Other basic criteria charac -
terizing the school can also 
be included (e.g. urban/rural, 
public/private, accreditation status, or language of instruc -
tion). Enrolment figures are almost always shared (e.g. number School profile
 –School location
 –Public/private status
 –Accreditation
 –Enrolment
 –Special education
 –Language of instruction
 –Health and nutritional 
status
 –School newsEthics and Corruption in Education55 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
of boys and girls enrolled), and in a few cases specific data is 
shared on pupils’ socio-economic profiles and the number of 
pupils with special needs (Guatemala).
Funding
Financial data are found in about 
half of the  initiatives document -
ed through  IIEP-UNESCO’s 
re search. In the case of My 
School  in Australia, information 
about ‘the school’s recurrent 
and other income (Australian 
and state governments’ recur -
rent funding, fees, charges, 
parental contributions, and other private  sources of income) 
together with its capital expenditure per calendar year’ 
(Rabinowitz, 2018) is provided for each school. Transparency 
boards (TBs) published in Filipino schools at the request of 
the Department of Education provide the most detailed in-
formation about funding issues (i.e. cash disbursements and 
advances, cheque numbers, payee particulars, payments for 
travel expenses, training, office supplies and repairs, and 
maintenance of school buildings).
Information about the financial contributions of parents is 
also provided in a few cases –  not on the amount collected, 
but rather the amount expected for different services. For 
 example, the school report cards developed under the aegis 
of Transparency International Bangladesh (TIB) specify which 
school services are free and which are subject to payment, so 
as to ensure that parents know which fees they are (and are 
not) required to pay (Roy and Miah, 2018). In the same vein, Funding
 –School budget
 –Parental contributions
 –Other sources of 
income
 –Donations
 –StipendsEthics and Corruption in Education56 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
amounts and eligibility criteria for stipends are made acces -
sible under the Programme Monitoring and Implementation 
Unit (PMIU) project in Pakistan.
Condition of services
Open school data initiatives 
also provide a number of indi-
cators related to the condition 
of services, in particular the 
number of teachers (sometimes 
disaggre  gated by gender) and 
their qualifications. Information 
about facilities, equipment, 
and/or materials is also usual -
ly included, in the form of a list 
of amenities accessible in the 
school (e.g.  water, electricity, 
internet), or of the number of 
available items (e.g. textbooks). The quality of infrastructure 
or equipment is sometimes specified (e.g. classrooms in good 
condition, partially damaged, or damaged).
A few initiatives also incorporate data related to school 
safety. This is the case of the school report card in the state 
of Virginia, United States, which lists ‘the number of offences 
by category (e.g. weapons offences, offences against  student 
or staff, and property offences) for the last three years’ 
(Cheng and Moses, 2016), as well as the school report cards 
developed under the PMIU project in Punjab, Pakistan, which 
include infor mation about the presence of boundary walls 
around schools.Condition of services
 –Number of teachers
 –Qualification of 
teachers
 –Availability of facilities, 
equipment, and 
materials
 –Condition of facilities, 
equipment, and 
materials
 –School safetyEthics and Corruption in Education57 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
School governance and operation
Data related to school govern -
ance and operation can include 
factual infor mation about the 
existence of a school manage -
ment committee (SMC), the 
respons ibilities of SMC mem -
bers, and the status of the 
school plan or of school pro -
jects. They can also provide 
quantitative information on 
the number of meetings held by the SMC, or the number of 
 administrative or inspection visits.
Efficiency and performance
Open school data also  usually 
 include indicators that  illustrate 
the efficiency of the system 
(e.g. promotion, repetition, com-
pletion, reten  tion, and dropout   
rates). A few initiatives include 
data on student attendance, 
while two among those reviewed 
recorded teacher presence –  
namely, the school report card 
developed under the PMIU pro -
ject in Punjab, Pakistan,6 and the 
6 The PMIU school report card measures the physical presence of teachers (headcount) on the 
day of the monitoring and evaluation assistant’s visit across all filled teacher posts. Teachers 
on leave are counted as not present (Khan, 2018).School governance 
and operation
 –Governance structure
 –Inspection
 –SMC meetings
 –School projects
 –Community 
participation
Efficiency and 
performance
 –Promotion/repetition/
completion/retention/
dropout rate
 –Pupil attendance
 –Teacher presence
 –Student learning 
outcomes
 –School awardsEthics and Corruption in Education58 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
School Report Cards project in Ghana. Finally, school perfor -
mance was measured in under half of the initiatives reviewed 
using indicators such as the passing rate for the primary 
education certificate (Bangladesh), pupil results on nation-
al examination tests in literacy and numeracy (Australia), or 
school awards (Indonesia).
Parent and pupil satisfaction
Finally, a few initiatives take 
into consideration parent 
satis faction with the servic-
es provided by the school, 
measured through user sur -
veys. The dimensions assessed can vary according to the 
needs expressed. In order to calibrate participants’ rating of 
subjective aspects properly, guidance needs to be  provided. 
Under the National Taxpayers Association’s (NTA) project 
in Kenya, for instance, ‘parents are presented with an ideal 
 situation, a disastrous one, and an intermediate one for each 
issue concerned; in each case the facilitators are invited to 
get the group to reach agreement on a score’ (Dupain and Thu 
Phuong Nguyen, 2019). 
In other cases, complaints submitted by students and  parents 
to schools are publicly displayed, along with a record of 
whether they received a response. This is the case in the Cek 
Sekolahku project developed by Transparency International 
Indonesia (TII),7 and the Mejora tu Escuela online platform in 
Mexico.8
7 See http://ceksekolahku.or.id
8 See www.mejoratuescuela.orgParent and pupil satisfaction
 –Parent and pupil satisfaction
 –Complaints Ethics and Corruption in Education59 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Table 4 summarizes the main categories of publicized school 
data and provides a few illustrative examples.
Table 4. Main categories of publicized school data
Domains Categories of data Specific examples
School 
profileSchool location 
(urban/rural)
Public/private (status)
Accreditation
Enrolment figures
Special education 
information
Language of 
instruction
Health and nutritional 
status
School newsLocal map
Distance to cultural heritage 
sites
Number of boys/girls enrolled
Socio-economic profiles of pupils
Number of pupils with special 
needs
Funding School budget
Parental contributions
Other sources of 
income
Donations
StipendsAmount of the grant received
Capital expenditure
Budget for the canteen fund
Specification of free/paid 
services (fees, school meals, etc.)
Amounts and eligibility criteria 
for stipends
Condition of 
servicesNumber of teachers
Qualification of 
teachers
Availability of 
facilities, equipment, 
and materials
Condition of facilities, 
equipment, and 
materials
School safetyNumber of certified teachers
Condition of classrooms 
(damaged, partly damaged, good)
Number of toilets
Number of textbooks
Availability of drinking water/
electricity
Dangerous buildings
Internet access
Boundary walls
Number of offencesEthics and Corruption in Education60 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Domains Categories of data Specific examples
School 
governance 
and 
operationGovernance structure
Inspection
School projects
Community 
participationExistence of SMC
Responsibilities of SMC 
members
Number of meetings held by 
SMC
Number of administration/ 
inspection visits
Status of the school plan
Community support for teaching 
and learning
Efficiency 
and 
performancePromotion/repetition/
completion/ retention/
dropout rate
Pupil attendance
Teacher presence
Student learning 
outcomes
School awardsStudent attendance data by 
sub-groups
Student test results per cohort
Participation of students in 
vocational and training courses
Exam pass rates
Parent 
and pupil 
satisfactionParent and pupil 
satisfaction
ComplaintsPupils’ satisfaction score
Number of complaints received
Number of complaints dealt with
Lessons for planners
 —Select background information for the school profile.
 —Consider data about school inputs, processes, and outcomes.
 —Be selective regarding the amount of data for display.
 —Ensure proper disaggregation of data, while protecting data 
anonymization.Ethics and Corruption in Education61 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
2.2. Mobilizing various sources of data
Relying on EMIS data
Open school data originate primarily from existing educa-
tional management and information systems (EMIS). They 
build on the strength of a long-established data collection 
system applied countrywide, backed up by public adminis -
tration and resources. This is the case for government-led 
and some civil society-led initiatives alike. In Bangladesh, 
the school data published under the Bangladesh Bureau of 
Educational Information and Statistics (BANBEIS) website 
are  collected as part of the Annual Primary School Census 
conducted every year by the Directorate of Primary Education 
(DPE). A structured form is sent to all schools for completion, 
and the information is then compiled by the DPE. Similarly, 
in Indonesia the principal source of information displayed 
on the Sekolah Kita website is Dapodik, the Indonesian EMIS 
managed by the Ministry of Education and Culture.
In a number of cases, open school data initiatives integrate 
data from other official sources. This is the case, in particular, 
for national examination results collected from public exam-
ination agencies, but also for more specific data, such as 
school accreditation status, or lists of cultural heritage sites 
around schools obtained from other national agencies, as is 
the case for Sekolah Kita in Indonesia.9 In the event of  multiple 
sources of information, governments need to establish a 
 national protocol with all interested parties regarding the 
datasets to be displayed. In Australia, for instance,  ‘authority 
9 See http://dapodik.data.kemdikbud.go.idEthics and Corruption in Education62 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
for  determining the nature of the data sets and any further 
 development of My School rests with the Australian educa-
tion ministers through the Education Council. While there has 
been some opposition to the inclusion of some data sets from 
particular groups at different times, agreement has been 
 obtained through negotiation’ (Rabinowitz, 2018).
The process for collecting EMIS data can be quite lengthy 
and bureaucratic, particularly in large countries composed 
of multiple administrative layers. In Bangladesh, for instance, 
school principals and assistant teachers are responsible 
for completing the forms sent by the DPE in hard copy by 
May each year. Education officers at district levels, known 
as Upazila Education Officers (UEOs), are responsible for 
entering information into a database and submitting this in-
formation to the DPE. UEOs also make regular visits to schools 
to cross-check data (Roy and Miah, 2018). The overall process 
designed by public authorities is very much supply-driven. 
As a result, the data collected respond primarily to adminis -
tration needs. Moreover, the process is quite long, which can 
affect the timeliness of data. To address this second chal -
lenge, an increasing number of countries are now digitalizing 
the entire data collection process, replacing printed forms 
with mobile applications.Ethics and Corruption in Education63 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Digitalization and synchronization of data: Learning 
from the experience of the PMIU in Pakistan
Following the inception of the PMIU in 2005, Monitoring 
and Evaluation Assistants (MEAs) completed numerous 
 paper-based survey forms to collect data in public schools. 
Tabulation and standardization of results was a long,  arduous 
process, rendering the system inefficient. In August 2014, 
the PMIU and the School Education Department … worked 
with the PITB [Punjab Information Technology Board] to 
 develop an Android application for efficient data collec -
tion. As a result, MEAs can now submit forms digitally using 
hand-held SIM-enabled tablets, on a real-time basis. This 
system allows for instant reporting with pictorial evidence, 
geo-tagging of sites visited, and automatic SMS alerts on 
below-target performance. Provincial and district-level 
summaries are generated automatically based on data from 
forms submitted by the monitoring officers. This measure 
has helped to reduce data-entry time and has made data 
acquisition less prone to error through built-in validation 
checks. Real-time data generate updates to a centralized 
dashboard that offers access to consolidated information 
for timely trend analysis and decision-making.
Source : Khan, 2018.
Self-assessment and locally produced data
Several open data initiatives are now placing users at the 
centre of the data collection process, in recognition of the 
need for a more demand-driven approach. This is  particularly 
the case for a number of civil society projects that collect BOX 10Ethics and Corruption in Education64 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
information directly from communities using field surveys. 
In the case of the Community Score Cards implemented in 
Rwanda, for instance, teachers, students, parents, and ser -
vice providers are divided into four groups (with at least eight 
members per group), and then each group is asked to assess 
the effectiveness of the school based on a series of set indi-
cators, with moderators overseeing the scoring. Similarly, the 
Leadership Initiative for Transformation and Empowerment 
(LITE) in Nigeria conducts focus group interviews at village 
level to assess the level of satisfaction of young men and 
women, and older men and women, regarding specific as -
pects of education service provision, for instance teacher 
attendance (Cheng and Moses, 2016).
Some projects not only collect data directly from end users but 
also assist them in conducting their own self-  assessments. 
Under the school-assessment project held in Namibia, for 
 example, each school development committee member is 
asked to score school management and leadership, teach -
ing and learning, parent and community participation, and 
outside support on a scale of 1 to 4, before an overall rating 
is reached through consensus. In the case of Citizen Voice 
and Action in Uganda,10 ‘both the data sources and content 
of community scorecards are decided by community mem -
bers’ (Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen, 2019). Communities 
are invited by organizers to identify educational issues of par -
ticular importance to them (e.g. teacher attendance, student 
absenteeism, or provision of school lunches), and to indicate 
their respective levels of satisfaction.
10 For more details, consult World Vision International’s website: www.wvi.orgEthics and Corruption in Education65 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
School self-evaluation: Learning from the 
experience of EDU-Q Card in Peru
In the case of the EDU-Q Card, data collection is performed 
directly at the school level, based on a self-assessment 
 exercise supported by external observers provided by the 
NGO that carried out the pilot project. School inspectors 
who represent the local educational authority (UGEL) and 
have been trained in the EDUstars model, support the school 
in its improvement process, acting as external evaluators 
and facilitators during analysis of results by the  community, 
and assisting with design and improvement of the school 
plan. These interventions result in self-  assessments con -
ducted by the school community across five areas: the 
learning  environment, teaching approaches, the commit -
ment and skills of teachers, school leadership, and parental 
involvement.
Source : Brito, 2019.
Focus on school issues
CheckMySchool (CMS) in the Philippines has taken a  further 
step in reflecting user perspectives. The initiative does not use 
any pre-defined standards, and instead asks  communities 
themselves to determine the specific issues around which they 
wish to see improvement. Parafina (2018) defines an issue as 
‘anything that concerns or affects the  stakeholders’ experi-
ence of school services, prompting calls for improvement. Its 
data interest, so to speak, is issue-driven, need-based, and 
problem-oriented’. The idea is not to select particular data, but BOX 11Ethics and Corruption in Education66 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
rather to identify specific problems to be addressed. In other 
terms, the data need to be actionable. The issues can relate to 
school building or equipment, student welfare, teachers and 
personnel, learning materials, or funds. Once an issue has 
been selected, school and community meetings are held to 
collect the related data. Third-party volunteers participate in 
this process and follow up with local education authorities to 
ensure the issue in question is resolved.
A focus on school stakeholder issues:  
Learning from the experience of the Philippines
The central government in the Philippines conducts broad-
based consultations with stakeholders about information 
needs. Based on these meetings, it prescribes standard 
sets of information to be shared about schools. At the 
start and the end of the school year, school principals meet 
with stakeholders to discuss the posted information. For 
CheckMySchool , this process consists of identifying school 
stakeholder issues, collecting data about the issues, and 
then facilitating related discussions with various stake -
holders, both inside and outside the school. In some sense, 
the information access model of school report cards and 
Transparency Board can be said to be top-down, while the 
model used by CheckMySchool is bottom-up.
Source: Parafina, 2018.BOX 12Ethics and Corruption in Education67 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Data reliability checks
The value of open school data initiatives is entirely dependent 
on the accuracy of the data shared with the public. Mistakes 
can occur for multiple reasons: misinterpretation of the data 
collected, errors during the data collection process, misre -
porting of data on the written form, incorrect entry of figures 
into the database, and so on. In some cases, such mistakes 
can be unintentional; in other cases they are made on pur -
pose. Typical examples of the latter include the inflation of 
enrolment figures to attract more funds, teachers, or equip -
ment for the school; misreporting the condition of facilities 
to ensure renovation; or inflation of student attendance rates 
to receive more funds for stipends.
Such problems can be addressed through a variety of ap -
proaches, including:
 —Limit the number of intermediaries in the data collection 
process. Data digitalization constitutes an important step 
forward in this direction.
 —Synchronize the new data collected with other sets of data 
related to the same school and other schools, to facilitate 
early detection of anomalies.
 —Collect data more regularly to facilitate comparisons over 
time, and within similar timelines for all schools.
 —Review rules for the allocation of resources to schools, to 
make sure that they do not generate incentives to manipu-
late data (Levacic et al., 2004).
 —Run systematic data consistency checks and scrutiny at 
each administrative level concerned.Ethics and Corruption in Education68 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
 —Carry out spot checks to compare the data provided with 
registers and other documents available at the school 
level, with the support of independent monitoring agen -
cies (in India, states select 10 per cent of districts and 
5 per cent of schools from each block of selected districts 
for random back-checks).
 —Collect data more regularly to facilitate data comparisons 
over time, and to detect discrepancies accordingly.
 —Ask for clarification in case of irregularities, and impose 
sanctions when explanations are not satisfactory.
In a few cases, data collection is conducted by outsiders 
to the school. This is the role assigned to about 1,000 mon-
itoring and evaluation assistants (MEAs) under the PMIU 
project in Pakistan. ‘[U]nder the supervision of 36 District 
Monitoring Officers (DMOs), they collect data from Punjab’s 
54,000 public schools on a monthly basis across the school 
year (April to March)’ (Khan, 2018). However, this approach 
is costly, and does not circumvent the possibility of collusion 
between MEAs and school staff. To limit such risks, the PMIU 
changes the school allocation schedule of MEAs every month.Ethics and Corruption in Education69 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Verification and validation of data: Learning from 
the experience of Sekolah Kita in Indonesia
For the Centre for Statistical Data of Education and Culture 
(PDSPK), verification and validation are very important, and 
are conducted across several stages involving different 
actors. The first stage of data verification is  synchronization. 
When a school fails to synchronize its data, the data will 
need to be revised by the school operator. However, success -
ful synchronization does not ensure accurate school data. 
PDSPK must apply verification methods as part of a follow- 
up process intended to detect irregular data and biases.
The Sekolah Kita officer provides an example: ‘According 
to the formula, the number of classrooms should be corre -
lated with the number of students. Therefore, it will not 
make sense if the number of classrooms in the school build-
ing is so few and the number of students is so high.’ He also 
pointed out that the system notifies them when suspicious 
data appear. He highlighted a case where ‘all classrooms 
are broken. All of them, it is hard to believe and we will 
inform this to the District Office and they can verify it.’ When 
PDSPK detects data with validity and reliability issues, they 
notify the Directorates General and district leaders.
Source : Felicia, 2018.BOX 13Ethics and Corruption in Education70 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Lessons for planners
 —Build on the strengths of existing EMIS systems.
 —Digitalize the data collection process to reduce irregularities 
and delays.
 —Learn from the experience of civil society organizations to 
generate data that better respond to front-line user needs.
 —Understand the importance of issues that can be selected 
and addressed with the help of communities.
 —Consider different techniques such as data synchronization, 
data consistency checks, or spot audits for improving data 
accuracy.
2.3. Favouring relevant data comparisons
From self-comparison to comparisons with standards and 
other schools
Open school data can be used to take stock of the current 
status of a given school, but also to check how its  situation 
evolves over time, or to compare it against the national aver -
age or standards, and/or with other schools, as detailed below:
 —Comparison of the school with itself. Open school data 
can be used to track the progress made by a given school 
against each of the selected indicators. According to the 
frequency of data updates, progress can be tracked each 
month, each semester, or on an annual basis. When con-
sistent indicators are available over a longer period of 
time, they can be used to make year-to-year comparisons 
and observe general trends.Ethics and Corruption in Education71 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
 —Comparison of the school with standards. Some open data 
initiatives offer the possibility of comparing data on a 
given school with national standards (e.g. regarding pupil/
teacher ratios). Where time series are available, the evolu-
tion of student achievement for different subjects can be 
analysed and compared over time against national stan-
dards set by the Ministry of Education.
 —Comparison with other schools. Open school data can 
also be compared against the national average, or aver -
aged data for other districts, localities, or schools. For 
instance, in Madagascar, under the Amélioration de la 
gestion de l’éducation à Madagascar (Improving Education 
Management in Madagascar; AGEMAD) project, school 
results are shown using ‘smileys’ (outstanding, satisfac -
tory, failing, underperforming). Such comparisons can be 
misleading, however, if they fail to take into account con -
textual differences. For this reason, some initiatives limit 
the number of schools selected for comparison, or limit 
the schools considered for comparison to those charac -
terized by similar backgrounds.
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in 
Indonesia
About 90 per cent of parents who were aware of Sekolah Kita 
claimed to use the data available on the website to make 
comparisons between schools. The majority (52.7 per cent) 
compared schools against a set of standards, possibly national 
standards. Others used the data to make year-to-year compari-
sons (25.3 per cent) and comparisons with schools that shared 
similar characteristics (18.7 per cent). 
Source : Felicia, 2018.Ethics and Corruption in Education72 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Regarding the latter option, the most advanced way to offer 
users the possibility of making meaningful comparisons 
 between schools is the Index of Community Socio-Educational 
Advantage (ICSEA), developed by the Australian Curriculum 
Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA). As described 
by Rabinowitz (2018), ‘ICSEA provides a numerical scale of 
socio-educational advantage computed for each school. … 
The scale is based on a substantial body of research evidence 
which shows that the educational performance of students, 
among many other things, is related to certain characteristics 
of their family and school, such as parental education and 
occupation and school characteristics such as location and 
the socio-economic background of the students it serves.’ 
My School  then allows users to make comparisons between 
schools based on their ICSEA scores.
Conducting fair school comparisons:  
Learning from ICSEA
The Index of Community Socio-Educational Advantage (ICSEA) 
created by ACARA takes account of key factors in students’ 
family backgrounds (parents’ occupation, school education, 
and non-school education) which are known to have an influ-
ence on educational outcomes at school. In  addition to these 
student-level factors, school-level factors (geographical loca-
tion, proportion of Indigenous students) are considered when 
summarizing educational advantage or disadvantage at the 
school level. ICSEA provides a scale that represents numeric -
ally the relative magnitude of this influence, and takes into 
account both student-  and school-level factors. It thus pro -
vides a basis for fair comparisons between schools in which 
students have comparable levels of educational advantage.
Source : Rabinowitz, 2018.BOX 14Ethics and Corruption in Education73 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Scoring based on composite indicators
A few open data initiatives exhibit a preference for  providing 
results (often in graphic form) obtained by each school on 
one or several composite indicators intended to measure the 
current situation regarding inputs, performance, and so on. 
In Niger and Togo, for instance, three major composite indi-
cators are used: a context difficulty index (which takes into 
account, for instance, the existence of a canteen); an input 
index (which takes into account the availability of specific 
human or materials resources); and an output index (which 
combines indicators related to school performance). Users 
are able to compare the results obtained by their school on 
each of those composite indicators against national or local 
mean values (Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen, 2019).
Similarly, under the School Excellence Report in Colombia, 
each school receives a score for its combined performance 
against a number of indicators (i.e. school climate, progress, 
performance, efficiency) on a scale of 1 to 10 (Cheng and 
Moses, 2016), which can be tracked over time. This type of 
approach can help to rapidly identify high-performing and 
low-performing schools in the system, as a tool for local 
public authorities to take action.Ethics and Corruption in Education74 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Design of heat maps to track school progress 
over time in Punjab, Pakistan
The PMIU creates heat maps which divide districts within 
Punjab into three different shades of green, based on how 
they meet optimal-performance targets. A performance of 
90 per cent and above on any indicator is represented by 
dark green, 88 to 86 per cent results in a neutral shade of 
green, while any performance below 86 per cent is shown 
in light green. A heat map of any month can be obtained by 
selecting the desired timeframe on the PMIU website. This 
feature is used regularly by the chief minister and his team 
to assess the performance of the education system across 
the province.
Such an approach draws attention to the continued under -
performance of schools in the rural south of Punjab, and 
encourages reform programmes to develop innovative solu-
tions for these target areas. Furthermore, the most recent 
performance of any school in a northern or southern dis -
trict, whether rural or urban, can be viewed at the touch of 
a button. The PMIU automatically organizes each  indicator’s 
results for the year against previous years. Users can view 
the forms submitted by monitoring officers, see how the 
performance of any district compares to another, and assess 
progress against education outcomes in Punjab compared 
to government targets.
Source : Khan, 2018.BOX 15Ethics and Corruption in Education75 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Prerequisites for school comparisons
There are two major prerequisites for school comparisons 
under open school data initiatives: first, the indicators used 
must be consistent over time, and, second, standardized data 
must be available across the system. This is not necessarily 
the case for some data, such as teacher attendance, which 
are often self-reported, some performance data in the ab -
sence of a national curriculum, or uniform standardized tests 
at country level.
Lessons for planners
 —Facilitate the self-comparison of schools over time.
 —Maintain to the extent possible consistent indicators over 
time.
 —Provide access only to fair comparisons across schools, 
taking into account socio-educational differences.
 —In the absence of standardized data, avoid using proxies.
2.4. Envisaging a wide range of formats for data 
presentation
Simplification versus risks of misinterpretation
As open school data can target a variety of stakeholders 
(e.g. local education authorities, school principals,  teachers, 
SMC members, parents, students, communities), a key chal -
lenge for designers is to establish an adequate balance 
between presenting data in a simple and user-friendly format 
and limiting the risks of misinterpretation. Rabinowitz (2018) Ethics and Corruption in Education76 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
summarizes this issue in reference to the Australian experi -
ence: ‘there is a clear tension between displaying data in a 
form widely understood by users and at the same time mini-
mizing risks associated with the misinterpretation of the data. 
While there are various requests and suggestions regarding 
improving the “user-friendliness” of My School , the balance 
needs to favour maintaining technical accuracy over efforts 
to simplify the presentation of data.’
One way to proceed is to produce two types of report card 
based on the same set of school data: the first targets local 
and school authorities, which are more  familiar with  statistics 
and can use them for planning purposes; the second is aimed 
at the public at large, and presented in a more accessible 
format, allowing communities to  monitor resources and out -
comes at the school level. This model was used for the school 
report cards of Improving Education Management in African 
Countries (AGEPA) in Zambia. Two types of school report 
card were generated, one for local officers and schools, with 
a focus on particularly  vulnerable groups such as orphans, 
refugees, or pregnant girls, and the second for communi-
ties, which featured current information about school inputs 
and performance using visual aids (Dupain and Thu Phuong 
Nguyen, 2019).
Civil society organizations have experimented with a wide 
range of techniques to display data in a user-friendly manner, 
including in the context of illiterate communities. As students 
in the Philippines noted, it is important to present data in a 
clear and simple way, and to pay attention to ‘the size of the 
postings, size of fonts, choice of colours, use of non-  technical 
language, and use of graphics and illustrations’ (Parafina, 
2018). The students also highlighted the need to incorpor -Ethics and Corruption in Education77 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
ate stories illustrating the benefits of open data. Broadly 
speaking, it is essential to ensure the data are accompanied 
by explanations about their meaning, how to interpret them, 
and how they can be used for school improvement. When dis -
played online, the system can allow users to access more 
detailed and technical data, as required.
Visual presentation: the School Excellence Report in Colombia and the 
Sistema Nacional de Indicadores Educativos11 (SNIE) in Guatemala
Source : Horacio Alvarez, Inter-American Development Bank, cited in Cheng and Moses, 
2016; SNIE website.12
Periodic versus real-time publication of data
Very few countries have succeeded in publishing data in real 
time, due to the need to verify the accuracy of information 
and clean the data for release. In most cases, data are pub -
lished only once or twice a year, usually at the beginning and 
11 National System of Educational Indicators.
12 http://estadistica.mineduc.gob.gt/
Ethics and Corruption in Education78 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
the end of the academic year. However, thanks to the possi-
bilities offered by new technologies, the time between data 
collection and publication is reducing, and the frequency 
of data release is increasing, with a gradual move towards 
near real-time publication. In the case of the PMIU project 
in Pakistan, for instance, the data collected by MEAs every 
month are published online in real time, and ‘users can sub -
scribe for auto-alerts to get updates on data related to spot 
visits’ (Khan, 2018). This is possible due to the independence 
of MEAs, who are fully trained and dedicated to this task.
Online versus offline communication channels
In the case of management-oriented approaches (see Sub-
section 1.3), open school data are released online via a virtual 
platform which tends to grow rapidly over time, covering all 
the schools in the country. At this scale, such a platform 
is the most obvious way to share information with a large 
public. During the initial phase, users can search by  localities 
or school names to access raw data about schools; how -
ever, once the system becomes more sophisticated, users 
may be able to generate tailored reports after selecting spe -
cific indicators. A typical example of such a platform is the 
U-DISE database in India. School report cards are presented 
on a dedicated website developed by the National Institute 
of Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA), and in -
formation on each school can be accessed via 14 filters on 
location (state, district, block, cluster, village), area (urban/
rural), school name or code, type of management (e.g. cen -
tral/local government, private aided/non-aided, madrasa 
recognized/unrecognized), level, and academic year.Ethics and Corruption in Education79 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
The School Report Cards website developed by NIEPA in India
Source : http://schoolreportcards.in
Internet penetration remains limited, though, and public web -
sites are not always user-friendly; thus, public authorities 
often instruct school authorities to also display school data 
on public notice boards. In Indonesia, for instance, Law No. 25 
Year 2009 on Public Services requires schools to display 
 information openly using banners, boards, or posters. When 
such instructions are not accompanied by proper monitoring, 
however, they are not enforced universally, or only partially. 
In Ghana, for instance, ‘the head teacher is supposed to post 
the [school report card] results openly. However, at present 
Ethics and Corruption in Education80 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
the majority of [school report cards] are posted only on the 
wall of the head teacher’s office, which greatly limits access 
to this school-level data’ (Cheng and Moses, 2016).
School information board in Bangladesh
Source : Roy and Miah, 2018.Ethics and Corruption in Education81 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
Limits to online databases: The example  
of PMIU in Punjab, Pakistan
It is interesting to note that PMIU data were not accessed 
through the website by parents, head teachers, or teach -
ers. This indicates that the government’s choice of an online 
database for the publication of school-specific data might 
need reconsideration. Furthermore, it is worth noting that 
smart phones seem to be the key resource for accessing 
data; however, the usage of these data is dependent on 
access to phones and the income levels of parents, result -
ing in higher concentrations in urban areas. Having data 
available in English has limited its audience, with efforts 
needed to incorporate more local languages.
Source : Khan, 2018.
Open school data initiatives that employ a participative 
 approach are often more imaginative in the ways that they 
share information with the public, and more selective in the 
data they display. They employ a wide variety of formats and 
channels to communicate information, including colourful 
posters, banners, factsheets, short brochures, information 
documents, and so on. They also make sure that the infor -
mation is displayed in open public spaces where it is easy to 
see and read (e.g. school entrances, main corridors, official 
school boards). They encourage reference to school report 
cards on the school website (if any) or the school newsletter. 
If resources allow, they can be reproduced for distribution to 
the general public.BOX 16Ethics and Corruption in Education82 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in 
Bangladesh
Parents’ means of accessing school data (multiple responses)
School monitoring boards 21.6%
Leaflets 78.4%
Parent gatherings 91.2%
Mothers’ gatherings 100%
Source : Roy and Miah, 2018.
Passive versus active information campaigns
While information campaigns are important, however, they 
are not sufficient in themselves to ensure that people access 
information. Hence the need for active information cam-
paigns that solicit public participation (Read and Atinc, 2017). 
These can involve reading out loud the content of school 
report cards during SMC and/or community meetings, and 
presenting them during special school events (e.g.  flag- 
raising ceremonies in some parts of Indonesia). However, in 
Bangladesh, ‘more than 25 per cent of parents stated that 
they experienced difficulties in reading the display boards or 
leaflets due to their poor level of education. Access to school 
data therefore depended on informative, open, and friendly 
mothers’ gatherings, especially for those with literacy defi-
ciencies’ (Roy and Miah, 2018).13
13 TIB has long experience in empowering women through the organization of mothers’ 
gatherings, Active Mothers’ Fora, and mothers’ workshops. It helps them take action and 
strengthen their role in society accordingly.Ethics and Corruption in Education83 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
“  The question most often encountered first when 
introducing a [school report card] to a community 
is, ‘What does this mean?’ The second question is 
frequently, ‘What can I do about it?’
Source : Cheng and Moses, 2016
As a consequence, there is a need for additional ways to 
communicate data efficiently, especially in communities 
characterized by socio-educational disadvantages. These 
can take the form of mothers’ gatherings during which data 
are not only shared but explained, and there are interactive 
discussions to explore ways to act upon this information and 
improve school results. In Colombia, for instance, the results 
of school excellence reports are discussed at school level 
every 25 March, a day designated by the Ministry of Education 
as a ‘Day of Excellence’. On this day, school principals and 
teachers are encouraged 
to discuss school per -
formance and strategies 
for school  improvement, 
with technical guidance 
provided (Cheng and 
Moses, 2016). However, 
such partici  pation pro -
cesses are, of course, 
more costly than simply 
publishing information. 
One way to limit costs 
is to build on existing 
management and social 
mechanisms.
Mothers’ gatherings in Bangladesh
Source : Roy and Miah, 2018.Ethics and Corruption in Education84 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
The various communication options presented above are 
summarized in Figure 4 .
Figure 4. Which communication options offer greater data accessibility?
Simplification vs 
misinterpretation 
risks
Real time vs periodic 
publicationPassive vs active 
information 
campaigns
Online vs offline 
communication 
channelsWhich communication 
options offer greater 
data accessibility?
Lessons for planners
 —Design one school report card for local and school authori -
ties, and another for users in a more accessible format.
 —Use colour codes, non-technical language, and visual 
elements.
 —Use online databases as well as more traditional means to 
display information (e.g. public noticeboards that are easy to 
spot).
 —Ensure that data are presented and discussed at school meet -
ings, mothers’ gatherings, and other special school events.
 —Provide necessary resources and support to school author -
ities to conduct such events, and use existing management 
and social mechanisms as far as possible.Ethics and Corruption in Education85 iiep.unesco.org
2. How to choose the content and format  
for open school data
In summary: Choosing the content and format for open 
school data
Data content Data sources Comparison Format Access 
School profile
Funding
Condition of 
services
School 
governance 
and operation
Efficiency 
and 
performance
Parent 
and pupil 
satisfaction
Community-
devised 
issues EMIS
Government 
policies, 
orders, rules, 
etc.
Standardized 
tests
Other official 
data
Survey and 
focus group
Community 
observation 
and 
perceptionSchool with 
itself over 
time
Similar 
schools
Schools in 
the same 
district
Local mean 
value
National 
mean value
National 
standards
Standards 
decided by 
communities Paper or 
electronic 
school 
card 
(one-page 
summary 
of 
indicators)Online 
database
School 
website
Electronic mail
School public 
noticeboard
School 
management 
meetings
Parent 
gatherings
Mothers’ 
gatherings
Special school 
events
School journalEthics and Corruption in Education86 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal 
access to and efficient use of 
open school data
3.1. Who needs open school data and for what purposes?
Key questions for planners
 —What categories of stakeholder will benefit from the release 
of open school data?
 —For what reasons will the various stakeholders be accessing 
the data?
 —How will different stakeholders make use of the data?
Once school data are released, in theory they can be ac -
cessed and used by everyone in society. However, in reality, 
when managed by central education authorities, the content 
and format of open school data tend to follow the educa-
tional management information systems (EMIS) from which 
they come, and thus respond to the needs of planners and 
managers rather than parents or communities. Brito (2019) 
argues that in Latin America, open school data target mostly 
decision-makers and the administrators of large-scale edu -
cation systems and researchers, as ‘their level of complexity 
requires technological knowledge to access them, as well 
as some expertise to understand and make sense of them’. 
In other words, sharing information with the general public 
comes as an afterthought.
Yet the value of open school data lies in the fact that data are 
shared with a broader set of actors. While central, local, and 
school authorities may be used to accessing school data, 
they are rarely accessed by teachers, parents, students, and Ethics and Corruption in Education87 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
 communities, with the possible exception of those who par -
ticipate in school management committees (SMCs). Each 
of these parties may have different motivations for access -
ing and making use of data (e.g. to remain informed, to pilot 
changes at local or school level, to collect feedback from 
users, to hold other actors accountable for their actions, to 
share stories, and to conduct analytical work). Each of those 
reasons needs to be unpacked carefully in order to respond 
to the  question: who needs data and for what purposes?
When launching an open school data initiative, the priority 
should be to get primary stakeholders to use data. In this 
context, it is useful to establish a distinction between pri-
mary stakeholders (i.e.  teachers, parents, students, and 
communities); secondary stakeholders (i.e. education and 
school authorities, including SMCs, and civil society, whose 
interest is conditioned by the feedback or actions taken by 
primary stakeholders based on the information  provided); 
and  tertiary stakeholders (i.e.  media, researchers, and 
donors). The  generic functions and/or purposes of the infor -
mation for those different stakeholders can be categorized 
as: planning, reporting, becoming informed about the status 
of facilities and services, raising awareness about problems, 
holding actors accountable, monitoring, advocacy, sharing 
stories, and conducting analytical work.
“  My School data has become critical in enabling 
us to better match supporters and schools facing 
disadvantage. We have built an interactive map, 
allowing people to determine which schools they 
can support in a particular region.
A donor in Australia (Rabinowitz, 2018)Ethics and Corruption in Education88 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Table 5. Mapping data beneficiaries and reviewing their possible motivations
Data beneficiaries Are the 
data new 
to them?For what purposes might they use  
open school data?
Central education 
authoritiesNo Planning
Local education 
authoritiesNo Planning, monitoring, 
accountability
School authorities No Planning, reporting
Teachers Often Reporting, information, 
awareness, accountability
Parents Yes Information, monitoring, 
awareness, accountabilityStudents Yes
Communities Yes
Civil society Yes Monitoring, accountability, 
advocacy
Media Yes Sharing stories
Researchers Sometimes Data analysis
Donors Sometimes Planning
■ Primary stakeholder ■ Secondary stakeholder ■ Tertiary stakeholderEthics and Corruption in Education89 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Stakeholder interest in the publication of 
school data in the Philippines
For school heads, the interviews revealed that the relevance 
of [school report card] information was not so much a matter 
of interest, but rather one of performance and  reporting 
 requirements. For teacher association officials, the data 
were relevant to gauge school performance and help them  
fulfil their responsibility to inform parents and the public 
about the school’s condition. For PTA [parent -teacher asso -
ciation] officers, the information was relevant because 
they ‘want to know the status of the school: is it improving, 
are our children studying well and safe, are we following 
standards?’ … Student leaders, meanwhile, perceived the 
relevance of information in terms of their aspirations to help 
‘raise awareness’ and ‘make issues and problems visible’.
Source: Parafina, 2018.BOX 17Ethics and Corruption in Education90 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Table 6. Data beneficiaries and identified purposes of information
Data 
beneficiariesIdentified purposes of information
Education 
authoritiesIdentify school performance above or below set 
standards
Target resources to schools requiring extra support
Promote policies for improving results
Support the formulation of school improvement plans
Assess the impact of new policies or measures
Provide an overview of a particular school
School 
authoritiesProvide an overview of their school
Make requests for annual budgets and extra support
Monitor school results over time and in comparison with 
standards or other schools
Report school indicators to parents, students, and the 
community
Collect feedback from parents, students, and the 
community
Formulate a school improvement plan or strategy
Teachers Acquire knowledge of the status of their school and its 
performance
Request better educational conditions
Report school indicators to parents, students, and the 
community
Collect feedback from parents, students, and the 
community
Discuss strategies to support learning
Contribute to the formulation of a school improvement 
plan or strategyEthics and Corruption in Education91 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Data 
beneficiariesIdentified purposes of information
Parents Acquire knowledge about the status of their school and 
its performance
Compare data with other schools for the purpose of 
school choice
Provide feedback on their school
Request better educational conditions
Discuss strategies to support learning
Contribute to the formulation of a school improvement 
plan or strategy
Students Acquire knowledge about the status of their school and 
its performance
Provide feedback on their school
Request better educational conditions
Discuss strategies to support learning
Communities Acquire knowledge about the status of their school and 
its results
Provide feedback on their school
Request better educational conditions
Discuss strategies to support learning
Contribute to the formulation of a school improvement 
plan or strategy
Civil society Conduct advocacy work
Media Collect publishable materials and share stories
Researchers Review trends, analyse the impact of specific measures 
and reforms, make comparisons between schools, 
document the experience of over/underperforming 
schools
Donors Identify schools that require extra supportEthics and Corruption in Education92 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data 
in Australia
The majority of school actors (69.05 per cent) confirmed that their 
main purpose in using the site was to monitor their own school’s 
performance. A third of school actors indicated that they used 
the My School data for planning, and around 40 per cent cited its 
use for providing information to parents and the community, par -
ticularly through newsletters and school annual reports.
Source : Rabinowitz, 2018.
It is important to note the specific situation of teachers within 
this framework. Teachers are indeed not only responsible 
most of the time for reporting data to parents and communi-
ties, they are also direct users of information. The existence of 
open school data allows them to access information that for -
merly fell under the purview of school authorities. They can 
use it to participate in debates on school improvement and 
request better educational conditions. Roy and Miah (2018) 
note that in Bangladesh ‘many teachers were happy with the 
Transparency Board and supported it because they saw it as 
a breath of fresh air in the context of the usual administration 
of schools. The simple act of putting the information board 
outside the office of the principal meant a lot’. Parafina (2018) 
also emphasizes the interest of teachers in open school data 
in the Philippines compared with other stakeholders.Ethics and Corruption in Education93 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
“  I believe that we need to understand school data, 
not only outsiders, but we, as insiders of this 
school, need to understand and use data more 
effectively.
A teacher in Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in the 
Philippines
Stakeholder assessments of the importance of publishing 
school data
Philippines Parents Teachers Community leaders
Very important 89.8 93.1 100
Important 9.8 6.9 0
Not so important 0.4 0 0
Not important at all 0 0 0
Source: Parafina, 2018.
Lessons for planners
 —Give priority to primary stakeholders targeted by open school 
data, namely teachers, parents, students, and communities.
 —Review and categorize the main reasons why each of these 
stakeholders accesses and uses information.
 —Consider the particular case of teachers, who are respon-
sible for reporting data to parents and communities but are 
also users of this information.Ethics and Corruption in Education94 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
3.2. Prioritizing the most relevant data for users
Key questions for planners
 —What data are regarded by users as most relevant and useful?
 —Are the published data easy to understand?
 —How can demand for information be stimulated among a 
broad public? 
Planning open school data requires identifying from the 
outset which data are most relevant and useful to teachers, 
parents, students, and communities. Management-oriented 
approaches, in contrast to participation-oriented  approaches, 
often lack this perspective. Lack of consideration for data 
needs may well explain the mixed views of parents regarding 
the importance of data in the cases of Australia and Pakistan, 
where management-oriented approaches prevail, compared 
to Indonesia and the Philippines, where both government and 
civil society initiatives entail the engagement of parents and 
communities (see Table 7 ).
Table 7 . Parents’ assessment of the importance of publishing school data in 
Australia, Indonesia, Pakistan, and the Philippines
Australia
%Indonesia
%Pakistan
%Philippines
%
Very useful 5.1 66.1 26.0 89.76
Quite useful 10.3 32.9 27 .0 9.83
Not very useful 20.5 1.0 35.0 0.43
Not useful at all 18.0 0.0 12.0 0.0
Source : Field survey data collected as part of IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school 
data in Australia, Indonesia, Pakistan, and the Philippines.Ethics and Corruption in Education95 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
In fact, among the six categories of data that can be 
 included in open school data,14 only half appear to be of 
particular  interest for teachers, parents, students, and com-
munities:  efficiency and performance, condition of services, 
and funding. Indicators seen as most useful are those that 
 reflect concrete issues of direct relevance to them (e.g. stu-
dent attendance, school facilities, and textbooks), while 
other indi cators, such as student socio-economic profile, 
 repetition, dropout and promotion rates, school inspection, 
and community involvement, are perceived as responding 
more to the administration’s needs. School safety is also 
listed by  parents as crucial (see Table 8). Some variations 
can be observed among socio-economic groups.
“  The concerns of teachers and students reflect the 
worlds in which they live, which is why they focus 
on indicators that concern activities that they 
witness or deal with personally on a daily basis, 
such as textbooks or attendance.
Source: Khan, 2018
14 School profile; funding; condition of services; school governance and operation; efficiency 
and performance; and parent and pupil satisfaction.Ethics and Corruption in Education96 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Table 8. Percentage of parents who declared open school data to be 
‘most useful’
Type of data
Bangladesh
%
India
%
Indonesia
%
Pakistan
%
Philippines
%
Number of students 73 77 60 39 85
Student socio-economic profile NA 39 37 7 50
Student attendance 77 84 78 86 93
Repetition, dropout, promotion NA 56 42 30 49
Number of teachers 85 87 69 59 89
Teacher attendance 86 89 67 29 92
Teacher qualification NA 74 73 23 94
School income NA 77 57 10 85
School facilities 88 84 83 90 91
School equipment NA NA 85 57 90
Textbooks 82 84 85 36 87
Student test scores 89 84 83 60 68
School inspection NA 60 49 28 87
Community involvement 63 NA 47 19 91
Parental satisfaction NA NA 66 NA 87
School safety 86 83 84 55 97
NA: Not applicable.
Source : Field survey data collected as part of IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school 
data in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, and the Philippines.Ethics and Corruption in Education97 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in 
Bangladesh
Field data indicate a difference between the perceptions of 
 parents in rural and urban areas. Wealthier groups of parents 
(who are predominantly urban) are more concerned about school 
facilities, textbooks, the school grade, exam results, community 
services, security, and services available at schools. The poorer 
groups of parents (who live predominantly in rural areas) are 
more interested in information on student attendance, teacher 
numbers and attendance, the passing rate in the PEC [Primary 
Education Certificate] exam, stipends, and so on.
Source : Roy and Miah, 2018.
Focus on student learning
Referring to field data, Roy and Miah (2018) note that ‘most 
parental expectations are limited to obtaining their  children’s 
exam results and accessing services for their children to 
which they are entitled’. Similarly, Felicia (2018) indicates 
that in Indonesia, ‘parents tend to be more interested in data 
closely related to teaching and learning’. In the Indian context 
where pupils’ results are not included in school report cards, 
parents indicated an interest in proxies that can help moni-
tor learning, such as dropout or transition rates. Finally, Khan 
(2018) explains that in Punjab, Pakistan, parents of children 
who have already repeated a year or enrolled late are likely to 
be interested in promotion, retention, and dropout rates, while 
parents of children with good results are more likely to focus 
on exam performance.Ethics and Corruption in Education98 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Focus on the learning environment
School facilities, equipment, and textbooks are rated highly 
in terms of importance by teachers, parents, students, and 
communities. In the Indian context, for instance, this includes 
data about the availability of midday meals, drinking water, 
and electricity supply, separate toilets for boys and girls, and 
playgrounds. More specifically, data about school facilities 
and textbooks are seen as particularly relevant for tracking 
a school’s financial resources and fighting corrupt  practices 
(e.g. by 87 per cent of parents of children in TIB intervention 
schools in Bangladesh) (Roy and Miah, 2018).
Focus on parental financial contributions
In most surveyed countries, information about school 
 budgets falls under the responsibility of the administra-
tion. Yet in some places parents expressed an interest 
in accessing  information about stipends and exam fees 
(Bangladesh), or funds that they themselves provide to the 
school (Philippines); in other words, financial information re -
flecting their own contributions.
Focus on children’s well-being
Data related to children’s safety, such as the existence of 
secure boundary walls (India), teachers’ behaviour,  complaints 
of bullying (Philippines), number of offences by category 
(e.g. weapons, offences against student or staff) (Virginia, 
United States) are also important considerations for parents 
and pupils.Ethics and Corruption in Education99 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Lessons for planners
 —Consult users’ representatives (e.g. teacher unions, parent 
representatives, student unions, community leaders) about 
the data they want to prioritize.
 —Select data accordingly, with a focus on information that is 
‘issue oriented’.
 —Organize surveys to adjust the set of data on a regular basis 
according to evolving needs.
3.3. Ensuring equal access for all to data
Key questions for planners
 —Is the presentation of data (use of symbols, graphs, simple 
 indicators, etc.) clear?
 —What are the optimal means to ensure accessibility to data?
 —What is the best way to ensure that all users can access data 
equally?
If not planned properly, open school data may well lead to 
an access gap, with literate and well-connected populations 
being their main beneficiaries, while populations with low 
literacy rates and limited access to the internet are largely 
excluded. In practice, open school data approaches that rely 
on online platforms, such as the Unified District Information 
System for Education (U-DISE) in India or the Programme 
Monitoring and Implementation Unit (PMIU) in Pakistan, Ethics and Corruption in Education100 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
face huge problems of accessibility, although the problems 
often extend across socio-economic barriers, with around 
90 per cent of all parents stating that they were unaware 
of U-DISE school report cards in India. However, when ‘dis -
semination takes place offline and through face-to-face 
interaction’,  according to Parafina (2018), ‘no inequity in 
access [is] found’. Similarly, the often assumed access gap 
between urban and rural populations is not always corrobo -
rated by facts.
“  In rural areas, many parents have limited access 
to technology [and] feel that they do not have the 
capacity to participate in school … Parents in urban 
areas tend to be busy, they don’t have time to 
visit their children’s schools and attend meetings. 
Participation is a problem in all schools.
A Transparency International Indonesia (TII) officer (Felicia, 2018)
Limiting inequity, however, entails a number of proactive 
measures. First, the publication of data at school level must 
be made compulsory by law, with penalties specified in case 
of non-compliance. Without these safeguards, there is a 
strong risk that data, or at least some data, will not be shared 
with the public, or shared only for a very limited period of 
time. Second, data need to be distributed in attractive for -
mats (using simple terms, infographics, etc.), presented in a 
way to encourage engagement among the target audiences, 
and placed in strategic locations that are easily accessible. 
Third, sharing of information must be conducted through a 
combination of online and offline communication channels 
(e.g. websites, posting on school boards, school meetings, 
mothers’ gatherings, published reports, leaflets, posters).Ethics and Corruption in Education101 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Figure 5. Means used by parents to access Cek Sekolahku and Sekolah Kita 
in Indonesia
Radio
Newspaper
Website
School board
Discussion with public
School meeting
Report
 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
¢ Cek Sekolahku  ¢ Sekolah Kita
Source : Felicia, 2018. 
Note: Cek Sekholahku has been developed by Transparency International Indonesia, while 
Sekola Kita is a government led-initiative.
Particular emphasis needs to be placed on interactive face-
to-face meetings as the preferred means for accessing 
school data. This was backed up by 94.5 per cent of parents 
in the case of Department of Education school report cards 
in the Philippines, 89.7 per cent of teachers, and 88.9 per 
cent of community leaders (Parafina, 2018). Where literacy 
barriers are a factor during such meetings, measures can be 
mobilized, such as reading leaflets that contain school infor -
mation out loud, setting up an advice and information desk, 
actively involving all parents in discussions to ensure they 
understand the information, providing refreshments during 
mothers’ gatherings, and so on.Ethics and Corruption in Education102 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
“  Parents participate more actively in TIB-
supported mothers’ gatherings because of their 
attractive techniques and extra efforts like public 
announcement through mobile loud speaker, 
providing refreshment during mothers’ gatherings.
An Upazila Education Officer in Bangladesh (Roy and Miah, 2018)
“  At the community level, human interaction is an 
important supplement to the supposedly technical 
and cold objectivity of data. Access for most 
people at the community level goes beyond the 
physical transfer of data from government to them. 
It is through the animation of discussion, problem-
solving, or any kind of exchange or engagement, 
that people often begin to make sense of data.
Source: Parafina, 2018
The success of face-to-face meetings is conditioned by the 
capacity of facilitators to make information understand  able, 
and to manage discussions in an inclusive way: ‘We want 
[school data] to become appealing and understand able re -
gardless of the educational status of people’ (Parafina, 2018). 
In some cases, school principals and/or SMC members can 
play a key role in facilitating dialogue. Teachers can also be 
instrumental in promoting engagement among illiterate or 
semi-literate populations. And third parties can be mobilized, 
such as community volunteers in the case of CheckMySchool  
in the Philippines, parents who play the role of cultural  brokers 
in the case of Cek Sekolahku in Indonesia (see Box 18), or field 
officers for citizen report cards in Nigeria.Ethics and Corruption in Education103 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
The role of ‘cultural brokers’ in the  
Cek Sekolahku project, Indonesia
In order to address the low level of parent participation, the 
local officer in Semarang hired a parent representative and 
trained her in the concept and goals of Cek Sekolahku. She 
became a cultural broker linking Cek Sekolahku officers, 
schools, and local communities in the school neighbour -
hood. She attended meetings and gatherings including with 
district leaders. The parent representative encouraged other 
parents to participate and take action in monitoring the 
school budget and programme. She acknowledged that this 
was not easy for some parents, who were afraid to question 
school policies and were worried that their criticism would 
affect their children, but after she explained that the anon-
ymity of informants who submitted complaints to schools 
would be protected, some parents decided to participate.
Source : Felicia, 2018.
Lessons for planners
 —Make the publication of school data compulsory at school level 
by law, specifying penalties in the event of non-compliance.
 —Combine online and offline communication channels to adapt 
to the needs of target audiences, emphasizing face-to-face 
interactive discussion.
 —Use inclusive techniques to engage all socio-economic 
groups in the dialogue, with the help of third parties (e.g. a 
cultural broker).
 —Make sure that students are given opportunities to join the 
conversation about school data.BOX 18Ethics and Corruption in Education104 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
3.4. Building the capacities of stakeholders in using 
school data
Key questions for planners
 —What training activities will be provided to stakeholders to 
help them make use of school data?
 —More specifically, how will the general public be empowered 
to demand change?
 —What budget funds will be mobilized to support this whole 
process?
Actual use of open school data can be hampered by two major 
challenges. First, individuals may remain passive, relying on the 
engagement of others. This is what Barr et al. (2014) refer to as 
the ‘free ride’: to save time and effort, some prefer ‘not to partic -
ipate, while benefiting from the efforts of those who do’. Second, 
individuals may lack knowledge about their rights and entitle -
ments, be unable to read and interpret the data, find it difficult to 
speak and act collectively, and/or be reluctant to use grievance 
mechanisms where these exist. To boost buy-in, it is important 
to set up training activities  responding to their specific needs.
Such training activities can be organized on a variety of topics 
for each category of stakeholders. For instance, local officers 
can be trained in how to collect, manage, and control data. 
School principals and members of SMCs can receive training 
on the practical usage of open school data, and effective ap -
proaches to promote information disclosure. Teachers can be 
trained in how to use data to introduce pedagogical changes, 
and in how to organize parent and mothers’ gatherings in an ef -
fective manner. Parents can be trained in how to use data for Ethics and Corruption in Education105 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
school improvement, how to monitor the school budget, and 
how to speak with a collective voice. Specific information ses -
sions can also be held with students at the  beginning of the 
school year on how to use data to effect school improvements.
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data
In India, a majority of parents (90 per cent) stated that they never 
attended any training or received any kind of guidance either in 
the schools or in the community regarding potential usage of 
the U-DISE school report cards.
In Indonesia, about 52 per cent of parents reported that they 
had participated in activities designed to inform them about 
open school data under the Cek Sekolahku project. Out of this 
proportion, about 54 per cent were ‘greatly encouraged’ by 
the ability to access school data, 37 .1 per cent were ‘somewhat 
 encouraged’, and the remainder were ‘not encouraged’.
Source : Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018; Felicia, 2018.
Supporting the participation of stakeholders through train-
ing represents a significant investment for open school data 
promoters. The cost for government-led initiatives can be par -
ticularly significant, as the number of people to be trained is 
huge, training capacities at local level are often reduced, and 
responsibilities for training tend to be distributed across dif -
ferent layers. The per-pupil cost of a participation-oriented 
initiative undertaken in Uganda (the Citizen Voice and Action 
programme) is estimated at US$1.5 per year (Lassibille et al., 
2010). Possible options to reduce costs include producing 
handbooks and guidelines, using existing consultation and 
training structures, and mobilizing civil society actors.Ethics and Corruption in Education106 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Table 9. List of possible training topics by stakeholder
Stakeholders Examples of topics for training
Local 
education 
authoritiesModality and practical usage of open school data
Methods and tools for data collection, management, and 
control
School 
authoritiesModality and practical usage of open school data
Effective approaches to information disclosure
Reading and interpretation of simple statistics
Reading and analysis of student learning assessments
Evidence-based decisions in schools
SMCs Modality and practical usage of open school data
Effective approaches to information disclosure
Techniques to foster parent and student involvement
Teachers Effective approaches to information disclosure
Use of data for school improvement
Use of data to introduce pedagogical changes
Techniques to foster interaction with parents and students
Effective organization of parents’ and mothers’ gatherings
Parents Use of data for school improvements
Monitoring of the school budget
Speaking with a collective voice
Procedures to lodge complaints
Volunteers Techniques to foster parent and student involvement
Managing complaints and conducting complaint 
verification
Students Use of data for school improvements
Communities Use of data for school improvements
Speaking with a collective voice
Media Right to information in education
Access to and understanding of open school data 
initiativesEthics and Corruption in Education107 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Lessons for planners
 —Formulate a training plan including categories of stake holder 
targeted by the initiative.
 —Organize training sessions or seminars for all students (not 
just student leaders).
 —Use existing consultation and training structures to reduce 
costs and ensure greater sustainability.
3.5. Monitoring outcomes and impacts of open school data
Key questions for planners
 —What outcomes are expected from the open school data 
initiative?
 —What longer-term impacts are expected?
 —How will evidence about outcomes and impacts be collected?
The outcomes of open school data initiatives will likely impact 
five domains: information, planning and management, avail -
able resources, education processes, and performance:
 —Improvement in information : Demand for more information, 
more often, with more stakeholders able to access and 
verify it, can lead to improvement in the quantity and qual -
ity of school data. Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen (2019) 
note that school report cards in Ghana ‘allowed EMIS to 
collect two types of information it had previously lacked: 
teacher attendance and pupil attendance’.Ethics and Corruption in Education108 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
 —Improvement in planning and management: Open school data 
initiatives can contribute to a stronger focus on evidence- 
based planning, better consideration of community needs 
in school improvement plans, the institutionalization of 
feedback loops, and the operationalization of complaint 
mechanisms. School principals, in particular, can be incen -
tivized to undertake their management and supervisory 
duties more carefully (e.g. keeping enrolment and atten -
dance registers, monitoring teacher absences, reporting 
to local authorities).
“  100% of the schools receiving support to introduce 
[school report cards] had improvement plans 
approved by their SMCs, as against 61% at the 
start of the programme.
Source : World Bank, 2017
 —Improvement in available resources: By providing infor -
mation to users, open school data initiatives can help fix 
identified shortcomings in terms of fund leakage, teacher 
shortages, missing textbooks, and deficiencies in school 
infrastructure or equipment. In Guatemala, for instance, 
those responsible for the School Card (‘Ficha escolar’) 
programme indicated that open school data allowed 
school principals to request a budget corresponding to 
their school enrolment figures. Similarly, in TIB interven -
tion schools in Bangladesh, parents used school data to 
pressure education officers to increase funding for their 
schools (Roy and Miah, 2018).Ethics and Corruption in Education109 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in the 
Philippines
In the case of the School Report Card/Transparency Board and 
CheckMySchool programmes, teacher actions took the form 
of pressuring education and school authorities to make better 
use of funds (68.75 per cent and 66.67 per cent, respectively), 
pressuring authorities to reduce corruption in the purchase and 
use of facilities (43.75 per cent and 41.67 per cent), requesting 
 authorities to increase funding (43.75 per cent and 41.67 per 
cent), and demanding that authorities improve education  quality 
(37 .5 per cent and 33.33 per cent).
Source: Parafina, 2018.
 —Improvement in education processes: Open school data can 
contribute to the clarification of roles and responsibilities 
of all stakeholders, and provide an accountability frame -
work to encourage them to fulfil their respective duties, 
especially in the case of participation-oriented  initiatives. 
The AGEMAD project in Madagascar, for instance, 
 resulted in improvements in how teachers executed their 
educational duties (i.e. lesson planning and preparation, 
continuous assessment of pupils, support for those with 
learning difficulties) (Lassibille et al., 2010). Other noted 
impacts include greater engagement of parents and com -
munities in school decision-making and corresponding 
changes in attitudes.Ethics and Corruption in Education110 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
“  Every Friday, the Bupati holds a town hall meeting 
where anyone can raise questions, complaints, 
or requests related to public services, including 
about education policies. The district leader 
admitted that the Bupati approach influenced 
school practices and, in particular, reduced forms 
of malpractice such as illegal levies and lack of 
good quality school facilities.
Source : Felicia, 2018
 —Improvement in performance: Improvements in terms of 
performance are more difficult to demonstrate, as many 
other factors contribute to changes in teacher or student 
 attendance, repetition and dropout rates, student results, 
and so on –  either contextual factors (e.g. school location, 
socio-  economic status of parents, their level of educa  tional 
attainment), or school factors (e.g. teacher qualification 
and training, number of instructional hours, availability 
of textbooks and other learning materials, class organiz -
ation and instructional approaches, school friendliness). 
However, some projects report improvements in pupil at -
tendance and punctuality (the AGEMAD project in Ghana 
and the Link project in Malawi), and repetition rates and 
teacher attendance (the AGEMAD project). Few projects 
report improvements in learning outcomes. Dupain and 
Thu Phuong Nguyen (2019) cite the midterm evaluation of 
Link’s INSPIRE project in Malawi, which ‘reports evidence 
linking improved academic performance with [the] intro -
duction of processes involving [school report card] use’ 
(Link, 2017).Ethics and Corruption in Education111 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
Table 10. Expected outcomes from open school data initiatives
Domains Examples of expected outcomes
Improvement 
in informationImproved content and functioning of EMIS systems
Better provision of data to schools and communities
Better appraisal of problems and their causes
Improvement 
in planning and 
managementStronger focus on evidence-based planning
Better district and school planning
Better execution of management and supervisory duties 
by school principals
Creation of a feedback loop with parents, students, and 
communities
Institutionalization of school and mothers’ gatherings
Capacity development of parents, students, and 
communities to suggest school improvements
Increased awareness among parents of their children’s 
right to quality education
Increased awareness among parents of their own 
responsibilities (pupil nutrition, attendance, punctuality)
Complaint mechanisms in place and operational
Improvement 
in available 
resourcesImproved transparency of the school budget
Increased community oversight over the use of resources
Requests made to improve facility and equipment based 
on data
Remedial measures taken to address shortcomings in 
the use of resources 
Improvement 
in education 
processesBetter execution of teaching duties by teachers
Greater frequency of SMC and PTA meetings
Increased number of meetings involving the school 
community at large (including the most vulnerable)
Increase in the number of home visits
More regular sharing of good practices among schools
Growth in the number of corrupt practices reported and 
addressed
Improvement 
in performanceImproved teacher and/or student attendance rates
Drop in repetition rates
Improvement in learning outcomes
Increase in exam passing ratesEthics and Corruption in Education112 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in the 
Philippines
The survey suggested that teachers were the most aggressive 
action-takers (55 per cent), and their personal accounts appear 
to show that [school report card] initiatives had the most impact 
on them. … Being equipped with monitoring tools and being able 
to sign off on certain decisions through [the school improvement 
plan], [the annual improvement plan], and even procurements, 
strengthened their position. Parents described more moderate 
actions, according to the survey (at most 29 per cent), and tended 
to rely on organized PTAs or other sectors, such as  teachers and 
third-party CheckMySchool monitors, to help them.
Source: Parafina, 2018.
Long-term impacts
At least four major long-term impacts of open school data 
initiatives can be identified. The first of these concerns 
the establishment of a mutual accountability framework, 
whereby the roles and responsibilities of each stakehold -
er (education authorities, but also school principals, SMC 
members, parents, students, and communities) are more 
clearly established. The second relates to the development 
of a culture of open government based on community partic -
ipation and empowerment and increased dialogue. The third 
involves the collective reading and interpretation of data, 
which can encourage sensible and shared analysis of infor -
mation, establishing a link with concrete problems at the 
service delivery level. Finally, the fourth long-term impact 
is the building of trust between education/school authori-
ties and the general public, by encouraging efforts to reach Ethics and Corruption in Education113 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
a consensus on working together towards better-quality 
education.
Figure 6. Snapshots of open school data impacts
In Australia, ‘principals more openly 
(and accurately) share information 
about the performance of their schools, 
and stakeholders and media are 
better informed about the limitations 
of the data when it comes to making 
conclusive judgements of performance 
based on single year results’ 
(Rabinowitz, 2018).In Indonesia, 
‘parents learned the 
importance of working 
hand-in-hand with 
teachers, rather than 
aggressively criticizing 
without helping them to 
find solutions’ (Felicia, 
2018).
In the Philippines, ‘for many stakeholders, the bottom line concerning 
the usability of the [school report card]/[transparency board] 
information is the increased level of trust in the school leadership. 
It becomes the antidote to the usual doubts about the capacity and 
integrity of school administrators’ (Parafina, 2018).
Lessons for planners
 —Distinguish between different types of outcome of open 
school data in terms of improved information, planning and 
management, available resources, and education processes.
 —Be sensible when defining performance outcomes, taking 
into account all other factors that play a role.
 —Pay due attention to the longer-term impact of open school 
data initiatives, in terms of mutual accountability and build-
ing trust.Ethics and Corruption in Education114 iiep.unesco.org
3. How to plan for equal access to and  
efficient use of open school data
In summary: How to plan for an equal and efficient use of 
open school data
The major steps required for successful design and imple -
mentation of open school data initiatives are summarized in 
Figure 7 below. 
Figure 7 . Major steps involved in the planning of open school data initiatives
Clarifying data for 
whom
Specifying data for 
what 
Prioritizing most 
relevant data for 
users
Adapting 
dissemination modes 
to target audiencesTraining 
stakeholders on how 
to use dataStrengthening 
compliance 
mechanismsMonitoring short- and 
long-term impactsEthics and Corruption in Education115 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data 
and accountability
4.1. Understanding various accountability models
Vertical versus horizontal accountability
The 2017/18 edition of the Global Education Monitoring Report 
defines accountability as ‘a process aimed at helping actors 
meet responsibilities and reach goals. Individuals or institu-
tions are obliged, on the basis of a legal, political, social or 
moral justification, to provide an account of how they met 
clearly defined responsibilities’ (UNESCO, 2017). Stapenhurst 
and O’Brien (2008) introduce a distinction between  horizontal 
accountability , whereby executive authorities are monitored 
by ‘a third body that enjoys relative autonomy’ (i.e. the par -
liament or the judiciary); and vertical  authority , whereby 
‘citizens, the media and civil society seek to  enforce standards 
of good performance on officials’. Applied to the education 
sector, this can lead to a distinction between monitoring 
procedures handled by public authorities (either internal or 
external) on the one hand, and social monitoring tools involv -
ing users and communities on the other.
Figure 8. Horizontal and vertical accountability within education systems
Providing accounts of how  
defined responsibilities are met
SCHOOLS
Horizontal accountability  Vertical accountability
INSPECTION SOCIAL AUDITSEthics and Corruption in Education116 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
The publication of data on school inputs, processes, and/
or performance can encourage both vertical and horizontal 
accountability. Although school data are often already ac -
cessible to education authorities, publication makes them 
more widely available across administrative levels (including 
local and school levels), and across stakeholders (including 
school management committees). Furthermore, publication 
of school data provides an opportunity for a larger range of 
stakeholders, such as parents, students, communities, and 
civil society organizations, to access and make use of these 
data. In both cases, publication encourages a change of cul -
ture, requiring that ‘teachers and administrators become 
comfortable discussing strengths and weaknesses, ex -
plaining a variety of statistical data and facilitating positive 
change’ (Anderson, 2005).
From answerability to enforceability
Such levels of requirement can be more or less demanding for 
the entities concerned. In some cases, accountability is  limited 
to answerability , with the concerned entity (e.g.  schools) 
asked to report on their activities (e.g. how funds have been 
spent). However, in some cases requirements extend further 
up to enforceability , with the concerned entity obliged to 
change behaviours or actions. While answerability can form 
part of (institutionalized) periodic or routine compliance pro -
cedures, enforceability necessitates in-depth discussions 
between the entity conducting monitoring and the  institution 
being monitored, in order to understand why standards have 
not been followed or objectives not met, and to establish 
means to address the situation and ensure that decisions are 
properly enforced.Ethics and Corruption in Education117 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Financial, management, and pedagogical accountability
Open school data initiatives can have an impact on three major 
 domains of accountability: financial, management, and peda -
gogical. Each of these is described in Table 11.
Table 11. Three major domains of accountability affected by open 
school data
Financial 
accountabilityManagement 
accountabilityPedagogical 
accountability
Public authorities 
and schools are held 
accountable for the 
timely and correct 
allocation and use 
of their resources, 
especially fundsPublic authorities 
and schools are held 
responsible for all 
management-related 
activities, such as teacher 
hiring, staff attendance, 
supervision of teaching 
and learning, and parental 
involvementPublic authorities 
and schools are 
held accountable 
for students’ 
knowledge and 
results
Financial accountability  implies that public authorities and/
or schools are held accountable for the timely and correct use 
of educational resources. The publication of school funding 
data can be used in two ways: first, it can give school author -
ities and/or users the opportunity to check that they have 
received the funds they were supposed to receive, on time; 
and second, it can give users (i.e. parents, pupils, communi-
ties) the opportunity to check that school authorities have 
used the funds in a transparent and appropriate manner. For 
this to happen, financial information needs to be  sufficiently 
detailed to be useful, as is the case with the transparency 
board (TB) in Bangladesh, which discloses all school financial 
transactions.Ethics and Corruption in Education118 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
“  We became more conscious because we are being 
checked. We managed the resources better based 
on needs, pursued the right strategy, and improved 
governance of resources. If you don’t do that, the 
collected data will show it.
A secondary school teacher in Bangladesh (Roy and Miah, 2018)
Management accountability  means that public 
au    tho      rities and schools are held responsible for all man-
agement-related  activities, such as teacher hiring, staff 
attendance,  supervision of teaching and learning, and pa-
rental involvement. Open school data initiatives will only 
affect specific aspects of man  agement on which they shed 
a light (e.g. number of teachers, teacher attendance or ab -
senteeism, number of school management committee [SMC] 
meetings). Released data on teacher numbers, for instance, 
can be used to detect instances of ghost teachers; however, 
information on teacher attendance and absenteeism needs 
to be specifically col  lected, and is therefore found in only a 
few cases.
Pedagogical accountability  implies that public authorities 
and schools are held accountable for students’ knowledge 
and results. In other terms, educational authorities ‘are 
held responsible for the quality of their products, namely 
students’ knowledge, skills, behaviours, and performance’ 
(Hallak and Poisson, 2017). These dimensions of account -
ability are  usually captured by data on student results, as 
measured through standardized testing. Such data can be 
used both by local authorities to provide extra support to Ethics and Corruption in Education119 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
underperforming schools, and by school stakeholders to 
discuss strategies to improve results. However, this domain 
is particularly complex as underperformance can be linked 
to myriad factors that are difficult to isolate and act upon.
Monitoring of teacher and parent accountability 
through Indonesian school report cards
Teacher attendance addresses the issue of teacher absen -
teeism, and is thus a mandatory indicator. The presence 
of other indicators varies by community, and can include 
whether teachers regularly assign students homework, 
whether they use corporal punishment, and whether they 
visit absent students. Teachers, in turn, employ indicators 
to better solicit and guarantee parental contributions to 
 student education. After establishing the key indicators, the 
village forms a user committee consisting of nine members 
(the school principal, teachers, representatives from the 
 village council, youth leaders, parents, and other com munity 
members). The user committee is tasked with monitoring 
and scoring each teacher and principal on a monthly basis. 
The monitoring methods vary by community and depend on 
the specific indicators chosen.
Source : Cheng and Moses, 2016.BOX 19Ethics and Corruption in Education120 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
School performance during the  
Day of Excellence in Colombia
During E-Day [the Day of Excellence], the national discus -
sion focuses on ways to improve student learning, starting 
with analysis of the Synthetic Index of Educational Quality 
(ISCE) and continuing with strategies to promote and 
strengthen reading and writing at home. All rural and urban 
schools, public and private, large and small, participate in 
E-Day. The clarity of school report cards and the simplicity 
of the information provided have been crucial to their use. 
Likewise, the emphasis placed by the Ministry of Education 
on exchanges between schools on index results and the 
formulation of improvement measures have led to positive 
impacts.
Source : Brito, 2019.
Open school data initiatives can address one or several of the 
domains of accountability listed above according to the prior -
ities set by their initiators. In the Philippines, CheckMySchool 
(CMS) encompasses ‘elements of management, financial, and 
pedagogical accountabilities as it welcomes and encourages 
disclosure on any issue that interests or affects the stake -
holders’ (Parafina, 2018). In most cases, school principals as 
well as teachers are the ones to be held accountable based 
on the information provided. But as illustrated by the above 
examples, local and central authorities, as well as parents 
and students, can also be held accountable based on the data 
provided.BOX 20Ethics and Corruption in Education121 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Lessons for planners
 —Clarify from the outset how open school data can contribute 
to improving accountability in the education system.
 —More specifically, reflect on how published data can help 
improve financial, management, and/or pedagogical account -
ability.
 —Exercise caution regarding the lessons drawn from school 
performance data.
 —Use open school data to promote vertical and horizontal 
accountability.
 —Ensure that school actors are not held accountable for deci -
sions taken at a higher level.
4.2. Formulating a theory of change
Experience shows that linking open school data and account -
ability is not necessarily straightforward in practice, as most 
initiatives lack ‘clear, effective accountability measures, 
as well as clear links to those capable of making changes’ 
(Cheng and Moses, 2016). Strengthening the link between 
open school data and accountability therefore requires a 
clear understanding of who is going to use the information 
provided and for what purposes, and the possible outcomes 
that can be expected. In other words, it is important to formu-
late a theory of change. Four main drivers for change can be 
considered within this framework.Ethics and Corruption in Education122 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Table 12. Four major drivers that link open school data and accountability
Linking data 
with…Main actors Theory of change
The market Parents
SchoolsSchools compete for 
enrolment, with parents using 
the information provided to 
choose where to enrol their 
children. Schools seek to 
promote and protect their 
reputation.
A collaborative 
planning 
imperativeLocal education 
authority
School authority
SMC
TeachersThe school authority is 
asked to develop a school 
improvement plan using 
school data, in consultation 
with the SMC and other school 
actors. The plan becomes 
a prerequisite for receiving 
funding.
Rewards and 
sanctionsCentral or local 
education authority
SchoolsLow-performing schools 
receive extra funding and/
or support (or are sanctioned 
in some cases) by the central 
or local education authority 
for achieving (or failing 
to achieve) set standards. 
High-performing schools are 
rewarded. 
User 
participationParents
Pupils (in a few cases)
Communities
School authority
Civil society
Media (in some cases)Users discuss public school 
data to identify problems and 
pressure the school authority 
and/or local education 
authority to remedy them.
Source : Adapted from Cheng and Moses, 2016.Ethics and Corruption in Education123 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
“  There is usually an assumed link that leads from 
awareness (through transparency and information) 
to empowerment and articulating voice (through 
formal and informal institutions) and ultimately 
accountability (changing the incentives of 
providers) so that they change their behaviour and 
respond in fear of sanctions.
Source : Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018
Market model
According to the market model , parents can use the infor -
mation provided on each school to choose where they want 
to enrol their children, with the result that schools compete 
for enrolment. In this case, publishing school data generates 
an incentive for school authorities and teachers to improve 
the service provided (e.g. quality of facilities, availability of 
equipment, student results) in order to attract pupils and 
access additional resources accordingly. Even in contexts 
where competition is low, the release of information encour -
ages schools to maintain or protect their ‘reputation’. Under 
this neo-liberal approach, parents are defined as ‘consumers’ 
of the education service operating in a ‘free market’, meaning 
that they can decide where to enrol their children regardless 
of location.
Such models are found in countries that have introduced a 
policy of school choice, with which both schools and parents 
are now familiar. Indonesia provides a good illustration of this 
approach, where school report cards are used by parents to 
select schools, but are also used by schools to promote their 
reputation –  as they are also authorized to select students 
(notably on performance criteria). This is described by Felicia Ethics and Corruption in Education124 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
(2018): ‘Influenced by the longstanding tradition of school 
choice in Indonesia, publishing information about schools is 
viewed by school-level actors as a way to promote school pro -
grammes and achievements.’ In other words, public data are 
used to serve local market competition.
“  Schools should publish our academic 
achievements, as this would reflect well on the 
institution, and thus make the students proud of 
attending a highly reputable school.
Students in Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)
Open school data initiatives that follow this market model 
focus on school performance data, regarded as the most 
important criterion guiding parental choice. However, other 
types of information that illustrate the quality of the offer 
(e.g. number of computer rooms, internet availability, extra- 
curricular activities, school or pupils’ awards) may also be 
added. Such a focus on performance has been criticized in 
the literature (UNESCO, 2017) for fostering a ‘teaching to the 
test’ culture, promoting competition among teachers, and 
increasing pressure on pupils. Critics also often cite the diffi-
culties some actors encounter in interpreting student results 
data correctly. Finally, the implications in terms of equity and 
inclusiveness are evident, with the most privileged groups 
enjoying easier access to a wider school offer, while more 
disadvantaged groups are limited to schools located in the 
vicinity.Ethics and Corruption in Education125 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
This market approach is not usually put forward by insti-
gators of open school data. Moreover, it is not applicable to 
contexts where school choice is not the general rule, or where 
the public school offer is limited. Roy and Miah (2018) note 
that in Bangladesh ‘parents who send their children to public 
schools, particularly in rural locations, prioritize proximity to 
their locality’, although they also consider school academic 
reputation. In Pakistan, 74 per cent to 86 per cent of parents 
surveyed stated that there was no correlation between their 
choice of school for their child and the information they 
 accessed on the school. In the case of My School  in Australia, 
initiators of open school data defend themselves against 
criticisms of promoting competition among schools, instead 
insisting that their aim is to concentrate on school gain (i.e. 
growth data) and to target areas for school improvement.
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in Punjab, 
Pakistan
When asked if the publication of school data influenced the 
 decision of parents to send their child to a particular school, 
74 per cent of respondents in Rawalpindi answered in the 
nega  tive. Similar trends were seen in other districts: 86 per cent 
of parents in Hafizabad and 80 per cent of parents in Chiniot 
agreed that there was no correlation between their child’s enrol -
ment and the information they had accessed through the PMIU 
[Programme Monitoring and Implementation Unit].
Source : Khan, 2018.Ethics and Corruption in Education126 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Figure 9. Parents’ reasons for selecting schools in Bangladesh 
(percentage; multiple response)
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
 Proximity  Academic  Lower Others
  reputation cost
¢ TIB intervention schools
¢ Non-intervention schools
Source : Roy and Miah, 2018.
Collaborative planning imperative model
Under the collaborative planning imperative model , the 
school authority designs a school improvement plan using 
open school data, in close consultation with the SMC and 
other school actors. The preparation of the plan becomes a 
condition for receiving funding. Such an approach needs 
to be seen in the wider context of the decentralization and 
self-management movement in the 1980s, which built on the 
idea that decisions are best taken at the point of implementa-
tion, and of shared decision-making at the school level, which 
emerged at the end of the same decade. According to Cheng 
(1996), the main rationale underlying this shift was that ‘the 
decentralization of power to school level could not guarantee Ethics and Corruption in Education127 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
that schools would use power effectively to enhance edu -
cation quality. Therefore, both school responsibility bearers 
and education service receivers should share the decision- 
making at the school level.’
Open school data provide an opportunity to reactivate this 
notion of shared decision-making at the school level, by 
 encouraging school communities to base their exchanges 
and reflections on a set of objective data that highlight the 
current situation of the school, and to give them elements to 
make comparisons with national standards or other schools. 
The fact that such data are shared not only with school prin-
cipals but also with SMC members, teachers, parents, pupils, 
community members, and so on, provides a further impetus 
to move towards more collaborative approaches. In the case 
of the Philippines, for instance, school authorities are asked 
to share school report cards with members during SMC meet -
ings, and also receive instructions to display them on a public 
noticeboard. All SMC members have the right to raise con -
cerns and provide suggestions, and to participate in the 
elaboration of the school improvement plan.
SMC meeting in India
Source : Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018.Ethics and Corruption in Education128 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Such an approach is not limited to government-led initi-
atives. In Malawi, for instance, the non-governmental 
 organization (NGO) Link decided to make use of open school 
data to  encourage collaborative planning approaches.15 The 
school community was invited to discuss school report card 
 content during the school performance appraisal meet -
ing,  identify problems, and formulate suggestions on this 
basis. The annual school improvement plan was then de -
signed accordingly, with Link providing training in school 
management to support the process. As a result of a simi-
lar approach, the World Bank (2017) calculated that all the 
schools in Ghana that  received support for the introduction 
of school report cards had approved improvement plans by 
SMCs, versus only 61 per cent at the start of the project.
“  Previously, school management decisions had 
been taken by a handful of school staff without 
really involving parents or the community, even 
though everyone in Malawi knew this type of 
arrangement was conducive to corruption.
A Link project manager in Malawi 
(Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen, 2019)
Rewards and sanctions model
The rewards and sanctions model links financial incen-
tives to school performance, using student test results as a 
15 See: www.lcdinternational.org/country/malawiEthics and Corruption in Education129 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
 refer  ence. It rewards high-performing schools and sanctions 
low-performing schools. Such an approach builds on the 
concept of performance-based funding, according to which 
the funding of inputs is insufficient to improve educational 
outcomes, hence the need to introduce financial incentives 
to motivate actors to change behaviours and practices in 
order to reach set objectives. Encouraged by the rise in test -
ing data and implemented in particular in the United States, 
this model has been criticized for its lack of impact on per -
formance, and for its detrimental effects on equity. UNESCO 
(2017) also cites criticisms that ‘tightly tying a single score 
to school livelihood is unfair, as test results are heavily de -
termined by factors outside school control, such as natural 
ability, socio-economic background, after-school tutoring 
and parental involvement’.
The rewards and sanctions model exists independent -
ly from open school data. Public education authorities can 
decide to target incentives based on the data they hold, 
without necessarily publishing them. However, few exam-
ples of school reports comprising performance data evolve 
in that direction, as illustrated by the example of school ex -
cellence reports in Colombia (Box 21). Others use indicators 
as an alternative to student results in order to detect low 
performance –  for instance, teacher attendance and absen-
teeism rates under the PMIU project in Punjab, Pakistan. In 
this case, teachers with full attendance can be awarded a 
bonus or receive public recog nition, while individuals whose 
attendance is irregular may incur minor penalties, or more 
serious sanctions including dismissal, when absenteeism is 
prolonged.Ethics and Corruption in Education130 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
School excellence reports and  
awards in Colombia
To increase accountability, the Ministry encourages schools 
to coordinate with local education offices and sign an 
‘Agreement of Excellence’ listing their goals for the follow -
ing year. At present, the Agreement of Excellence does not 
include consequences for success or failure. However, the 
Ministry of Education has announced that, as of 2016, it will 
start rewarding schools financially based on the degree to 
which they meet their self-  designated goals.
Source : Cheng and Moses, 2016.
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in Punjab, 
Pakistan
In Rawalpindi, all head teachers used data specific to their 
school to generate comparisons with other schools, with 66.6 
per cent of head teachers in Hafizabad and 50 per cent in 
Chiniot using data in a similar manner. These responses show 
how access to data on school self-performance, as well as on 
the performance of other schools in the same or other districts, 
can generate a spirit of competition, whether through beat -
ing personal records for the previous year, as in Hafizabad, 
or comparison with a manu factured score based on minimum 
 standards of performance, as in Rawalpindi.
Source : Khan, 2018.BOX 21Ethics and Corruption in Education131 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Most of the documented examples of open school data adhere 
to an opposite philosophy, however. Instead of sanctioning 
low-performing schools, they provide them with extra sup -
port. Under the PMIU project, for instance, teachers working 
in low-performing schools receive support and coaching, and 
students are given access to refresher courses (Khan, 2018). 
In the state of Colima in Mexico, school directors and teach -
ers ‘are advised how to interpret the ENLACE [Evaluación 
Nacional de Logro Académico en Centro Escolares; National 
Assessment of Schools’ Academic Performance] results and 
make corresponding pedagogical adjustments. Through the 
establishment of professional data networks, the schools [are] 
connected with best-performing schools in the same  locality, 
and advised on how to develop school improvement plans’ 
(Cheng and Moses, 2016). Similarly, in Australia, community 
organizations use My School data to support improvements 
in schools with a low score on the Index of Community Socio-
Educational Advantage (ICSEA).
User participation model
Under the user participation model , parents and commun-
ities are invited to access public school data, discuss them, 
and ask the school or local education authority to  address 
the highlighted shortcomings. The model assumes that 
the pressure exerted by users will lead public authorities 
to offer a better service. All open school data initiatives 
follow ing a participation-oriented approach adhere to this 
principle, accord  ing to which shorter routes of accountabil -
ity (e.g.   parents and school authorities) should be preferred 
vis-à-vis longer routes (e.g. citizens and the state), when the 
latter have proved their incapacity to resolve problems at the 
micro level. The close and continuous relationship between Ethics and Corruption in Education132 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
users and school or local education authority is considered 
a key feature to motivate providers to react and address 
difficulties.
To be effective, the user participation model requires that 
users not only have the opportunity to access information, 
but also to act upon it. When open data initiatives are limited 
to providing information to users, they follow what Parafina 
(2018) calls a ‘pre-public participation model’, citing the ex -
ample of school report cards in the Philippines. This example 
‘involves pre-public participation because [the Department 
of Education] limits the purpose of school report cards to 
information dissemination and communication, but never -
theless provides stimulus to citizen demand. Through the 
school report cards, stakeholders can inquire about issues 
and, based on that inquiry, apply pressure on school admin-
istrators to perform better.’ However, there are no structured 
mechanisms in place to ensure this happens, and no record 
of the requests or responses. As such, the effectiveness of 
the school report cards depends on the willingness of local or 
school authorities to respond to inquiries.
“  In some cases, school administrators prevent or 
discourage parents from asserting their right to 
inquire or demand because of the limited view 
that the school’s responsibility ends in providing 
information.
Source: Parafina, 2018
Several prerequisites improve the effectiveness of the user 
participation model. First, the organization of awareness- 
raising and capacity-development activities, with the help 
of civil society, is essential to ensure that parents (particu-Ethics and Corruption in Education133 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
larly mothers), communities, and teachers are well-informed 
about their roles and responsibilities, and to encourage 
them to raise questions related to teacher shortages and 
attend ance, pupil results, and so on. Second, it is important 
to aggregate and articulate the questions and concerns ex -
pressed by those using adequate community mobilization 
techniques. Third, the right of users to obtain a response from 
the school or local education authority needs to be enforced 
with the support of civil society, and sometimes also of local 
media.
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data in India
A majority of parents (90 per cent) mentioned that they have 
never attended any training or received any kind of guidance 
either in the schools or in the community regarding the use of 
information to demand accountability from schools.
Source : Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018.
Finally, it is hoped that increased public participation will not 
only contribute to holding schools and local  education author -
ities more accountable, but will also help ‘to coordin  ate efforts 
among all education stakeholders. Such coordination is im-
portant because education involves not only schools, but also 
parents and the community. Research indicates that improved 
communication and coordination results in a corresponding 
increase in the level of investment by all stakeholders to im-
prove children’s education’ (Cheng and Moses, 2016). In other 
words, the active engagement of all school actors in the pro -
cess not only leads a school or local education authority to Ethics and Corruption in Education134 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
act, but also encourages teachers to do better, and parents 
to devote more time and attention to their child’s education.
Lessons for planners
 —Design a clear theory of change that links open school data 
with accountability from the outset.
 —Give priority to ‘soft accountability’ models, such as collab -
orative planning imperative and user participation models, 
and consider the possibility of combining the two.
 —Be aware of the risks involved with ‘hard accountability’ 
models such as market and rewards and sanctions models, 
and try to limit them.
4.3. Incorporating corruption concerns from the outset
Open school data cannot address all corrupt practices in 
the education sector, but can help address some of them. 
To facili tate this process, the data should illuminate areas 
most vulnerable to corruption (e.g. school funding, facilities, 
equipment, textbooks, teacher attendance, parental fees). In 
Pakistan, for instance, all head teachers in surveyed districts 
stated that the indicators most critical in fighting corrup -
tion were teacher attendance, textbook provision, and school 
inspections (Khan, 2018). In the Philippines, ‘parents, teach-
ers, and community leaders are likely to use CMS rather than 
school report cards or TB data to reveal the misuse of school 
facilities, equipment, textbooks, and other resources (though 
this was less pronounced among teachers)’ (Parafina, 2018). 
In Bangladesh, parents emphasized instead the amount of 
 stipends, school  facilities, and textbooks (Roy and Miah, 2018).Ethics and Corruption in Education135 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Figure 10. Percentage of parents emphasizing the usability of different 
categories of data to fight corruption in Bangladesh
Enrolment rate
Repetition, dropout, and  
promotion of students
Services from school  
(free and paid)
Student attendance
Number of teachers
Number of students
Student test scores
Responsibilities of SMCs
Eligibility criteria and  
amount of stipend
School facilities
Textbooks
 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
Source : Field survey data collected as part of IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school 
data in Bangladesh: Results from Transparency International Bangladesh (TIB) 
intervention schools (Roy and Miah, 2018).Ethics and Corruption in Education136 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Table 13. Main characteristics and advantages and disadvantages of each 
accountability model studied
Theory of change Advantages DisadvantagesThe marketPressure on parents 
to send their 
children to best-
performing schools
Public access to 
school performance 
data
Competition 
between schools 
to improve 
performance
Pressure on school 
principals and 
teachers to improve 
resultsFocus on improving 
student resultsExacerbated 
competition among 
schools, teachers, 
and pupilsCollaborative planning imperativePressure on school 
principals to share 
authority regarding 
school planning and 
management
School data 
shared with school 
authorities, SMCs, 
and the general 
public
Production of 
a collaborative 
improvement plan
Pressure on school 
authorities to reach 
set objectivesImproved quality of 
the planning process
Identification of 
several dimensions 
for systematic 
improvement
Integration of school 
planning into the 
overall planning 
cycle Domination of 
school principals 
over other actors 
(SMCs) in the 
process
Limited involvement 
of other users in the 
processEthics and Corruption in Education137 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Theory of change Advantages DisadvantagesRewards and sanctionsPressure on 
schools to improve 
performance
Rewarding of high-
performing schools
Extra resources 
and/or support (or 
sanction) to low-
performing schools/
individuals
Schools/teachers 
modify their 
behaviourTargeting of extra 
resources and/or 
support to lower 
performing schoolsSchool performance 
reduced to test 
scores
Exacerbated 
competition 
among schools and 
teachers
Negative impacts of 
sanctionsUser participationPressure on school/
local education 
authority to take 
into consideration 
user perspectives 
on problems and 
solutions
Organization of 
activities involving 
communities 
(surveys, mothers’ 
gatherings, 
community 
monitoring)
Identification of 
priority issues to be 
addressed
School/local 
education authority 
takes action to 
address those issuesPromotion of user 
empowerment
Improved reflection 
of concrete needs at 
school level
Focus on immediate 
issues to be 
addressedLack of 
consequences for 
school authority/
local education 
authority
Limited capacity of 
school authorities to 
act when decisions 
are taken at a higher 
levelEthics and Corruption in Education138 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Moreover, a variety of domains where corrupt practices can 
occur are likely to benefit from open school data initiatives. 
These may vary according to the context, and can be grouped 
into three areas: school data, resource management, and 
staff behaviour. These domains are further analysed in the 
following sub-sections.
School data
The act of transparently displaying school data makes it much 
more difficult for a variety of actors to manipulate information. 
Cases in point include the number of pupils enrolled and the 
number of teachers. Publicizing this information facilitates 
easier detection of instances of inflated enrolment to attract 
more funds or the inclusion of ghost teachers on teacher 
payrolls. Moreover, the multiplication of data combined with 
their publication has encouraged initiators to standardize in-
dicators, enabling wider use of technology to capture and 
transmit data instantly, and to ensure data accuracy prior to 
publication. Under the PMIU project in Pakistan, for instance, 
standardized data are now collected using Android tablets 
that are synchronized directly to an online database, avoiding 
manual data entry (Khan, 2018).
In addition, thanks to the increased volume of school-level in-
formation, a wide variety of data are now collected on similar 
aspects, providing opportunities for cross-checking and de -
tecting potential anomalies. Under the Sekolah Kita project, 
for instance, each Indonesian school needs to submit sever -
al variables about students (e.g. student family background, 
distance between the student’s home and school) as well as 
teachers (e.g. qualifications, status) The ease with which it is 
possible to verify data and detect irregularities constitutes Ethics and Corruption in Education139 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
a strong deterrent against the manipulation of information. 
Similarly, under the Cek Sekolahku project in Indonesia, the 
condition of facilities are now determined by a system based 
on school responses to approximately 20 questions. This re -
duces the risk of overestimating damage to facilities in order 
to attract more funds, or underestimating damage to obtain 
good grades during school accreditation assessments.
“  This is an interesting fact: the number of primary 
school students keeps decreasing. With the 
Dapodik system in place, it is much more difficult 
for schools to inflate their student numbers. 
For each student, schools have to submit many 
variables including their demographic background, 
family background, academic progress, and even 
the distance between the student’s home and her/
his school. It is much more difficult to manipulate 
students’ data now.
 A provincial district representative in Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)
Resource management
The publication of financial information about schools can 
contribute to improving transparency regarding the allocation 
and use of funds. The case of Uganda, which is often quoted in 
the literature, illustrates how information campaigns and the 
decision to ask each primary school to post information on fi-
nancial inflows had a tremendous impact on reducing fund 
leakage. Such fund leakage dropped from 78 per cent in 1995 
to 18 per cent in 2001 (Reinikka and Smith, 2004). More recent 
examples illustrate how the display of financial data can be 
used by communities to inquire about school spending, and Ethics and Corruption in Education140 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
put pressure on school officials to make better use of funds 
–  as is the case with the TBs displayed by Filipino schools at 
the request of the Department of Education (Parafina, 2018). 
School fees and student stipends are yet other domains 
where open school data can play a useful role in reducing 
malpractice. Under the Cek Sekolahku project in Indonesia, in-
formation about the amounts requested from parents helped 
to uncover cases of collection of illegal fees, for instance to 
buy uniforms (Felicia, 2018). Similarly, in Bangladesh, ‘aware -
ness of the actual amount of the stipend, exam fees, and other 
entitlements empowered parents to raise their voices against 
irregularities in stipend distribution and payments’ (Roy and 
Miah, 2018). Information about infrastructure, equipment, or 
textbooks can also lead to improvements. Dupain and Thu 
Phuong Nguyen (2019) refer to the example of the Ethiopian 
Social Accountability Program, where ‘community monitor -
ing of infrastructure work reportedly led to the discovery of 
materials not meeting contract specifications and their re -
placement by the construction firm’.
“  For me, the most important information is the 
school budget. If we know how our school allocates 
the BOS [Bantuan Operasional Sekolah (School 
Operational Assistance Fund)] and other funds 
from the government, we will understand if they 
really spend the fund for the textbooks, chairs, and 
desks that are available in our classrooms. But if 
we find that many desks and chairs are broken and 
textbooks are not available, we can question the 
administrators about how they spend the funds 
and why they don’t prioritize our needs.
A student in Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)Ethics and Corruption in Education141 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Staff behaviour
Finally, the publication of data on teacher absenteeism is 
 debated in a small number of countries. In India, such data 
are not included in the Unified District Information System 
for Education (U-DISE), due largely to the lack of reliability of 
the indicator (i.e. self-reported in school registers) (Bordoloi 
and Kapoor, 2018), while in Indonesia, an innovative Android 
app is used to monitor school attendance and incorporate 
this information into the school report card. At the same time, 
efforts have been made to change community perception re -
garding teacher behaviours, and encourage  consequences 
in cases where teachers’ absenteeism is proven (Cheng and 
Moses, 2016). Beyond the issue of absenteeism, there are 
many testimonies regarding the capacity of open school data 
to self-regulate individual behaviours, with public educa-
tion  authorities and school actors tending to become more 
vigilant and cautious due to the increased monitoring oppor -
tunities generated.
“  School data foster efficiency by keeping teachers 
attentive at all times, since they are being 
inspected more closely than before.
A student in Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)
Building trust through a calibration policy
Although open school data can help reduce malpractice, the 
fight against corruption is rarely presented as their main ob -
jective, but rather as an induced effect. There are two main 
reasons: first, anti-corruption policies are often perceived by Ethics and Corruption in Education142 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
actors as ‘another  regulation competing with policies such as 
teacher quality and curriculum’ (Felicia, 2018); second, initi-
ators of open school data are concerned with building trust 
and fostering collaboration, and as a consequence prefer to 
emphasize the positive benefits of open data and encourage 
ownership of the process. In other words, ‘stakeholders tend 
to avoid risky confrontation, shaming, or legal administrative 
cases in order to maintain harmonious interpersonal relation-
ships’ (Parafina, 2018).
However, open data do encourage action to address chal -
lenges relating to accountability, by generating questions 
and demands from users. With this in mind, Parafina (2018) 
pleads for ‘the introduction of [school report cards] as an in-
formation and communication tool attended to the growing, 
albeit often discreet, call for transparency from the school 
community, without antagonizing or threatening the princi -
pal’s leadership and authority’. The idea here is to facilitate 
incremental progress towards the integration of a  stronger 
anti-  corruption component, without threatening actors and 
creating resistance based on the fear of sanctions. This is 
illustrated by the Sekolah Kita project in Indonesia, which 
led to the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding 
between the Ministry of Education and Culture and KPK 
(Anti-Corruption Agency) in 2017 , with a view to increasing 
community participation in the monitoring of school facili-
ties, equipment, and teacher absenteeism.Ethics and Corruption in Education143 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Open school data: Communication 
or accountability?
In our official communications, the messaging really is that 
the School Report Card is for communication, but the policy 
could serve a secondary purpose [of accountability]. We 
didn’t articulate that in policy; we expected that as a po -
tential outcome of the School Report Card. Once schools 
become comfortable with opening up to stakeholders, when 
they become comfortable sharing their data, then later on 
the secondary purpose of promotion of accountability [will 
be served]. That’s why we present the School Report Card as 
a developmental tool. It may soon be calibrated as a tool for 
accountability. But, for the short term, because our school 
heads are not yet comfortable with the concept, we have to 
introduce it in a subtle way.
Source: Parafina, 2018.
Established consequences and complaint mechanisms
Identifying corrupt malpractice with the help of open school 
data is not enough. It is crucial to ensure that the  pressure 
exerted by parents, for instance, on education and school 
author ities to reduce fund leakage, make better use of funds, 
reduce ghost teachers or teacher absenteeism, and decrease 
corruption in the purchase of school facilities,  equipment, text -
books, and so on, leads to changes (see Table 14). Experi ence 
shows that this necessitates identifying who is responsible for 
the decisions involved, and at what level of the system, and the 
established or legal consequences for breaking the rules. For 
 instance, decisions about teacher management may not rest BOX 22Ethics and Corruption in Education144 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
with school authorities, but with local education authorities; in 
that event, actions should be directed towards the latter.
Table 14. Proportion of parents who reported using open school data to 
exert pressure on education or school authorities (by category of action)
Pressure on education or 
school authorities:
Government (Gov.) or 
civil society-led (CS) 
initiativeBangladesh Indonesia Philippines
Gov. CS Gov. CS Gov. CS
Increase funding — 57 .1 49.2 56.6 23.2 31.4
Reduce fund leakage — — 36.2 43.4 19.6 17 .6
Make better use of funds — 14.3 60.3 54.2 33.9 33.3
Increase teacher numbers — 33.3 28.5 38.6 14.3 9.8
Increase teacher 
qualifications— 9.5 65.4 68.7 21.4 19.6
Eradicate ghost teachers — — 23.1 31.3 10.7 11.8
Reduce teacher 
absenteeism— 19 36.2 41 19.6 19.6
Reduce corruption in the 
purchase/use of school 
facilities — 9.5 45.4 54.2 28.6 37. 2
Reduce corruption in the 
purchase/use of school 
equipment — 9.5 42.3 43.2 8.9 9.8
Reduce corruption in 
the purchase/use of 
textbooks— 23.8 40 45.8 14.3 15.7
Improve education quality — 71.4 67.7 69.9 32.1 37. 2
Source : Field survey data collected as part of IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school 
data in Bangladesh, Indonesia, and the Philippines.Ethics and Corruption in Education145 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Reporting irregularities and ensuring that they receive a 
formal response requires setting up operational complaint 
mechanisms. Several open data initiatives, most of which are 
civil society-led, have opened channels to file complaints. 
Under the Cek Sekolahku project carried out by Transparency 
International Indonesia (TII), ‘school agents’ (i.e. students, par -
ents, and teachers) voluntarily review and verify complaints. 
They receive training from TII and local district officers to follow 
an established protocol (see Appendix 3). Each complaint is re -
solved in under 10 days, and the conclusion is displayed on the 
school webpage, without disclosing names. Mejora tu Escuela, 
which encompasses 480,000 schools in Mexico, also enables 
users to file complaints online. Similarly, a hotline collected 
186 complaints (e.g. about dysfunctional facilities, teachers’ 
late arrivals) during the PMIU pilot phase in Pakistan.
Complaint mechanisms under  
Mejora tu Escuela in Mexico
The Mejora tu Escuela site includes an automated sec -
tion called the ‘School Window’. This section provides 
information on filing a complaint or sending a report to 
the competent authorities, and then following its progress. 
Through the site it is possible to report problems related 
to bullying, school infrastructure, lack of teachers, or col -
lection of fees. When the user registers a report, the page 
requests their  location, and automatically provides the 
contact details of the supervisor or comptroller from the 
Ministry of Education. In addition, when following up on their 
complaint, users receive information about the attention it 
received from the supervisor or comptroller’s office. This is 
a useful indicator to assess the effectiveness of the differ -
ent stakeholders involved in school problem resolution.
Source : Brito, 2019.BOX 23Ethics and Corruption in Education146 iiep.unesco.org
4. How to link open school data and accountability
Lessons for planners
 —Consider which indicators can help monitor corruption risks 
in the sector.
 —Give priority to data related to funding, teachers, facilities, 
equipment, and textbooks.
 —Envisage a ‘calibration approach’ to avoid creating resistance.
 —Formalize established consequences for breaking the rules.
 —Set up an operational complaint mechanism to enable users 
to file complaints.
In summary: How to link open school data and 
accountability
Possible 
domainsTheories of 
change Corruption 
concernsLevels of impact
Financial 
accountability
Management 
accountability
Pedagogical 
accountability Market model
Rewards and 
sanctions 
model
Collaborative 
planning 
imperative
User 
participation 
modelsData 
highlighting 
corruption risks 
(e.g. budget, 
number of 
teachers, 
textbooks)
Clarification 
of who is 
responsible for 
what
Established 
consequences 
for breaking the 
rules
Complaint 
mechanismsTransparency: 
information 
posted; 
information 
posted and 
discussed
Soft 
accountability: 
clarification 
of roles and 
responsibilities; 
enhanced social 
monitoring
Hard 
accountability: 
establishment of 
consequencesEthics and Corruption in Education147 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: 
What are the risks?
5.1. Over-simplification of complex issues
What are the risks?
As open school data reflect the reality of individual schools 
through the prism of a limited set of indicators, they tend not 
to capture the complexity of underlying processes and situa-
tions. Rabinowitz (2018) notes that, in Australia, when asked 
about the extent to which My School  provides a balanced pic -
ture of their schools, the majority of school actors disagreed, 
with 39.47 per cent somewhat disagreeing and 21.05 per cent 
strongly disagreeing. Policy-making officials, when asked to 
comment on those figures, stated that school principals, in 
particular, consider that published data ‘can’t accurately rep -
resent all that is done’ at school level. In particular, excessive 
emphasis on pupils’ results, regardless of contextual factors, 
can generate improper conclusions, leading, for instance, to 
comparisons between districts or schools characterized by 
highly contrasted socio-educational indicators.
“  Schools are complex places that are hard to 
‘capture’ through any data sets. Our principals tend 
to be passionate educators who know that what 
schools deliver is not solely based on a list of data. 
They change lives and My School can’t accurately 
represent all that is done.
A policy officer in Australia (Rabinowitz, 2018)Ethics and Corruption in Education148 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
“  If districts within the province differ on the basis 
of literacy rates, resource allocation, and economic 
prosperity, it is to be expected that such factors will 
have an impact on the indicators measured by the 
PMIU [Programme Monitoring and Implementation 
Unit], including [Literacy and Numeracy drive] 
scores. An interviewee underscored how 
problematic it would be to compare a district in the 
south, such as Chiniot, with a district like Lahore.
Source : Khan, 2018
What options exist to address them?
A few options exist to confront these risks. They include either 
encouraging users to make comparisons with national stan-
dards rather than other districts or schools, or allowing them 
to make comparisons only with schools that serve populations 
sharing a similar socio-educational background. This was the 
choice made by the Australian Curriculum Assessment and 
Reporting Authority (ACARA) in Australia when designing the 
Index of Community Socio-Educational Advantage (ICSEA), 
which combines information about family profiles, school re -
moteness, and proportion of indigenous population. Other 
important options to consider include mitigating the focus 
on pupils’ results indicators, and trying to diversify data that 
document single dimensions.
Identified risk How to address it
Over-
simplification 
of complex 
issuesMitigate the focus on pupils’ results indicators
Diversify data that document single dimensions
Encourage comparisons with standard indicators
Create a socio-educational index that allows for more 
meaningful comparisons between districts/schoolsEthics and Corruption in Education149 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
5.2. Misinterpretations and distrust of data
What are the risks?
According to the results of IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open 
school data, a vast majority of interviewees did not associate 
any risks with the publication of school data (58.6 per cent 
of parents in Indonesia, 75.5 per cent in the Philippines, and 
up to 98.4 per cent in Bangladesh). However, among the risks 
identified, ‘varied interpretations’ or ‘error in interpretation’ 
(Parafina, 2018) were frequently evoked:
 —Misinterpretations can be linked to the difficulties experi -
enced by some users with understanding and interpreting 
figures correctly in the absence of basic statistical know -
ledge and expertise in educational management. Two 
types of data are of particular concern here –  those related 
to pupils’ results and those related to financial issues. In 
the Philippines, for instance, school principals expressed 
concerns about risks of ‘possible misuse or misrepresen -
tation of information, including on the school’s financial 
situation’ (Parafina, 2018). Similarly, in Bangladesh, assist -
ant teachers indicated that providing information on 
school income and expenditure could generate chaos, as 
many guardians16 are illiterate (Roy and Miah, 2018). In both 
cases, school authorities feared unexpected  questions 
and resulting pressure.
16 Person taking care of the child.Ethics and Corruption in Education150 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
“  ‘Varied interpretations’ or ‘error in interpretation’ … 
can create false impressions, offensive statements, 
and conflict among stakeholders. Possible 
intentional misuse also crops up as a risk, 
particularly in the context of a political agenda.
Source: Parafina, 2018
 —Misinterpretations can also be intentional, particularly in 
the context of political opposition (e.g. low performance 
results may be used by the opposition to underline the 
failure of the administration to fulfil its mandate). This is 
especially the case in contexts where the information pro -
vided by public authorities is not trusted, and also where 
the media are used to sensationalize information and in-
fluence the general public. Khan (2018) explains that 
in the context of Pakistan, ‘a high performance of 90% 
against any indicator, such as student attendance, would 
still prompt many critics to focus on the missing 10%’.
“  Information from citizen-led initiatives, such 
as ASER [Annual Status of Education Report], 
is picked up by television, newspapers, and 
campaigns very quickly, whereas government-
released information does not get the same 
traction with the media. It suggests that 
information published by the government is not 
trusted, which is linked to the public’s wider 
distrust of Pakistan’s political system and its 
leadership.
Source : Khan, 2018Ethics and Corruption in Education151 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
What options exist to address them?
Such risks of misinterpretation can be mitigated through 
capacity development and training activities to help users 
become more school-data ‘literate’ (see examples of possible 
training topics by stakeholder in Chapter 3, Section 3.4, Table 
9). Consultations with all stakeholders at different stages of 
the process, above all prior to the release of data, can also 
contribute to building trust and reducing scepticism, critical 
attacks, and defensive attitudes. In this respect, Roy and Miah 
(2018) note that school principals were less cautious than 
 assistant teachers about the risks attached to financial data. 
Through their exposure to new concepts and approaches in 
meetings and training sessions, ‘they had acquired greater 
understanding of the potential of opening up school data’.
Identified risk How to address it
Misinterpretation of 
dataMake school authorities aware of the potential 
of open school data
Build the capacity of stakeholders to analyse 
data and draw useful conclusions
Work with a variety of partners ahead of data 
publication to build trust
5.3. School competition and possible stigmatization
What are the risks?
The decision to publish school data related to performance 
indicators, measured in particular through pupils’ results, is 
seen by most stakeholders as a major incentive for parents 
to compare school results and enrol their child in schools dis -
playing higher results. In Indonesia, for instance, one-third of Ethics and Corruption in Education152 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
school report card representatives and one-third of parents 
declared that the highest risk generated by open school data 
was parents choosing to enrol their child in another school 
(Felicia, 2018). Similarly, in the Philippines, about half of 
 parents felt that open school data could influence their deci -
sion not to enrol their child in a given school (Parafina, 2018).
“  The number of students who had to repeat a grade 
level should not be published because it will make 
our school look bad. And if the school looks bad, no 
one will want to come here.
A group of students in Semarang, Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)
As a consequence, if not carefully monitored, open school data 
can result in increased competition among individuals and 
schools, the development of school marketing  approaches, 
and the production of national or local league tables by the 
media. Some schools displaying high performance  results 
may benefit from such developments. Cheng and Moses 
(2016) mention the case of private schools in Colombia that 
have responded favourably to requests made by the govern -
ment to undertake performance reviews, with the expectation 
of attracting more students. However, schools displaying low 
performance results may suffer from stigmatization. Felicia 
(2018) cites several schools whose image and reputation 
might be damaged as a result of displayed data.Ethics and Corruption in Education153 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
What options exist to address them?
A number of measures are available to avoid these develop -
ments, which could otherwise result in long-term detrimental 
impacts (e.g. undue pressure on actors, ‘teaching to the test’ 
practices, exclusion of weak students to increase overall 
school performance). Such options include: reflecting on the 
best measures to evaluate educational quality; explaining that 
the aim of such data is not to foster competition but rather 
to engage parents and communities in meaningful dialogue 
with local education and school authorities, concentrating on 
school gain and growth rather than annual results; uploading 
data as they become available or through staggered releases 
rather than as a single package; developing a communication 
and media strategy to accompany data release; and celebrat -
ing schools that register high gain and growth rates.
“  ACARA should use its ‘authoritative voice’ to ‘take 
the wind out of’ attempts by individual journalists 
or media sources to report to the public about the 
performance of schools.
A community actor in Australia (Rabinowitz, 2018)Ethics and Corruption in Education154 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
ACARA ’s communication strategy for  
the release of school data
Prior to the annual release of My School  data, stakeholder 
and media briefings are conducted to provide these groups 
with embargoed information, as well as information about 
a selection of schools around Australia that have achieved 
substantial gain/growth rates or high gain/growth in the 
National Assessment Programme –  Literacy and Numeracy 
(NAPLAN) compared to previous years. On the release date, 
ACARA provides information about and commentary on 
the data to schools and other stakeholders  electronically 
via email, social media, and a newsletter, and conducts 
media interviews as required. In the ensuing days, ACARA 
responds to enquiries from stakeholders and the media re -
garding the data and, where appropriate, data on particular 
schools. ‘We work closely with schools needing improve -
ment and “celebrate” rather than reward or punish schools. 
We “celebrate” by featuring the journey taken by some 
schools as case studies of success at an annual forum of 
school leaders (principals and deputy principals).’
Source : Rabinowitz, 2018.
Identified risk How to address it
School 
competition 
and possible 
stigmatizationReview quality assessment measures
Focus on gain and growth data
Design a comprehensive communication strategy
Work with media prior to data release
Celebrate schools registering high gain and growth
Publish data regularly as a routine (rather than as an 
event)BOX 24Ethics and Corruption in Education155 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
5.4. ‘Empowering the empowered’
What are the risks?
While open school data are made available to all, Gurstein 
(2011) argues that they tend to ‘empower those with access to 
the basic infrastructure and the background knowledge and 
skills to make use of the data for specific ends’. In other words, 
open school data primarily serve the interests of parents with 
higher literacy levels, better access to the internet, larger pos -
sibilities regarding school choice, and stronger influence. As a 
result, there is a tendency towards ‘elite capture’ of  information 
(Bruns, Filmer, and Patrinos, 2011). Conversely, those who are 
less educated, have a lower capacity to have their voices 
heard, and for whom participation represents higher opportu-
nity costs, can find themselves at a disadvantage.
In fact, such assumptions are not entirely validated by the 
results of IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data. Roy 
and Miah (2018) have not noted any significant variations in 
terms of access to data according to urban and rural cate -
gories or socio-economic group. They explain this pattern as 
follows: ‘parents of children in urban areas spend less time at 
schools as they are more occupied with work-related activi-
ties compared to rural parents’. And they also highlight that 
civil society actions tend to minimize inequalities. One could 
also argue that disadvantaged groups may see additional 
value in information to which  they would not otherwise have 
access, unlike more well-off groups.
However, under certain conditions open school data can 
clearly become a source of inequality, especially when they 
highlight differences between ethnic groups. Questions Ethics and Corruption in Education156 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
 surrounding this issue have been raised in countries such as 
Australia –  i.e. whether data related to indigenous and non- 
indigenous groups should be presented separately. They have 
also been raised in India, where IIEP-UNESCO’s researchers 
concluded that the publication of data across social groups 
or castes is not essential: ‘this is because when more and 
more parents start using this information, they might take 
 irrational decisions which could have an adverse impact on the 
public education system. For instance, parents who belong to 
a higher caste in the society might decide not to send their 
children to a school with a majority of students from a social -
ly disadvantaged background’ (Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018).
What options exist to address them?
A number of actions can be undertaken to reduce the detri-
mental effects of open school data on equality, in the context 
of a growing datafied market. These include the use of differ -
ent methods to disseminate information, with a view to 
reaching those least likely or able to access these data; the 
mobilization of civil society organizations to ensure the active 
and effective participation of lower socio-economic groups; 
and a prohibition on the release of ethnic-based statistics. 
Further details about related measures are described in 
Chapter 3 .Ethics and Corruption in Education157 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
Ethnic-based statistics in France
In its decision of 15  November 2007, the Constitutional 
Council forbade the processing of data necessary for 
 carrying out studies regarding diversity which infringe the 
principle laid down in Article 1 of the Constitution. As a 
result, the following were prohibited: (i) the processing of 
data of a personal nature indicating directly or indirectly 
the racial or ethnic origins of persons; and (ii) the introduc -
tion of variables of race or religion in administrative records. 
This applied to the National directory for the identification 
of natural persons. In its commentary, the Constitutional 
Council stipulated that the a priori definition of an ‘ethno- 
racial classification’ would be contrary to the Constitution.
Source: Translated from the Institut National de la Statistique et des Études 
Économiques (available at www.insee.fr/en/information/2388586).  
Identified risk How to address it
Empowering the 
empoweredUse different methods to disseminate information
Mobilize civil society organizations to ensure the 
active and effective participation of lower socio-
economic groups
Prohibit the release of ethnic-based statisticsBOX 25Ethics and Corruption in Education158 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
5.5. Power imbalance, tensions, and frustrations
What are the risks?
The opening up of information occurs in contexts with long- 
established relationships between educational stakeholders 
that cannot be changed overnight. As a matter of fact, data 
publication can be feared by local and school authorities (and 
in some cases by school management committees [SMCs] as 
well, as described in Box 26 ), as it undermines their  monopoly 
over information. Cheng and Moses (2016) refer to cases in 
Uganda, where ‘some local governments … see constant feed -
back from the community as a threat to their authority’, and 
others in Colombia, where school principals do not display 
school data, assuming ‘that the public lacks the capacity to 
understand the information, or [they] regard public accessi-
bility to information as a threat to their position’. Similarly, 
Bordoloi and Kapoor (2018) mention the ‘unwillingness of 
public schools to welcome parental involvement’.
“  Sometimes they [the schools] say, ‘we are afraid 
the public will misuse the information’ … They 
worry too much about open data, they worry it 
would harm them.
The leader of the Central Commission of Information in Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)Ethics and Corruption in Education159 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
Politicization of relationships at  
school level in Bangladesh
There is a provision to provide SMC membership to some 
local elites through nomination from their respective MPs 
[Members of Parliament]. In most of the cases, this  provision 
creates possibilities to appoint their own partisan local 
 political leaders. The political nexus between the elites and 
MPs empowers the SMCs in such a way that they  eventually 
tend to empower teachers over the Upazila Education Officer 
(UEOs), which hampers internal monitoring systems and 
 creates conflict between teachers and education  officers. …
As direct accountability to parents other than their repre -
sentatives (i.e. the SMC) is not mandatory, school authorities 
are reluctant to place themselves in contexts where they are 
answerable to parents, such as parents’ meetings or moth-
ers’ gatherings. Moreover, teachers generally aim to avoid 
unexpected questions from parents, and therefore work to 
manage these gatherings in such a way that the participants 
do not have an opportunity to raise or discuss their con -
cerns. Instead, the teachers tend to use these gatherings to 
provide advice to parents, but do not offer  opportunities for 
questions.
Source : Roy and Miah, 2018.
Two types of data appear to be particularly sensitive in this 
context. The first relates to the school budget. In reference 
to transparency boards (TBs), which display school financial 
transactions in the Philippines, Parafina (2018) explains that 
‘the budget is technically under the control and management 
of the school head. Such control can, when not properly moni-
tored, result in the highly discretionary use of the fund by the BOX 26Ethics and Corruption in Education160 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
school head’. Providing information about the school budget 
can thus contribute to reducing possibilities for school 
 principals to exert discretionary power. The second type of 
data relates to teachers’ attendance and pupils’ results. In 
Indonesia, for instance, some teacher unions opposed the 
publication of school-level information, viewing it as a tool 
‘mainly used to control us’ (Felicia, 2018).
“  The [school report card] keeps them [school 
principals] on their toes.
The Undersecretary of Education in the Philippines (Parafina, 2018)
On the other hand, communities, parents, and students may 
also be constrained by their ‘lack of experience with  popular 
democracy’ (Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018), or lack of  experi  ence 
of exchanging with local and school authorities, or even 
teachers. Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen (2019) cite ‘evi-
dence of intimidation, threats, and blunt refusals  experienced 
by communities following complaints or requests for ex -
planations’ in an external assessment of the Link project in 
Ghana, while in Kenya, parents exhibited concerns that their 
child may become a ‘scapegoat’. More generally speaking, ob -
stacles to changing the political environment at school level 
can entail passive behaviours and generate frustrations from 
actors unable to act upon information.
What options exist to address them?
Changing long-established relations between public author -
ities, school principals, teachers, parents, students, and 
communities takes time. Still, a number of measures can help 
adjust the way in which responsibilities are shared. These 
include building the capacity of all stakeholders to take Ethics and Corruption in Education161 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
collective decisions based on school data; ensuring strong 
facilitation of school/community meetings, so that ‘a positive 
and constructive tone is maintained throughout the dialogue’ 
(SPACO, 2004); ensuring that the identity of parents or stu-
dents is kept confidential when making complaints; and 
compelling authorities to provide timely responses to re -
quests (and transferring them to higher administrative levels 
when necessary).
Identified risk How to address it
Power imbalances, 
tensions, and 
frustrationsBuild the capacity of all stakeholders to take 
collective decisions based on school data
Ensure strong facilitation of school/community 
meetings
Ensure that the identity of parents or students 
is kept confidential when making complaints
Compel authorities to provide timely responses 
to requests
5.6. Data privacy and tracking of individuals
What are the risks?
Open school data initiatives provide information aggregat -
ed at the institutional level, not the individual level. Under no 
circumstances should individual data related to school princi -
pals, teachers, or students be shared with the general public. 
However, there are cases where information provided can be 
easily attributed to certain individuals, at which point it be -
comes ‘personally identifiable information’ (see Box 27). One 
such case is that of small schools, with one-teacher schools 
being an extreme case. Data related to teacher absentee -
ism, or pupils’ results, in such cases can easily be attributed Ethics and Corruption in Education162 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
to a small number of people or even one person. These situ-
ations open up possibilities linked to the ‘tyrannous side’ of 
‘making the invisible visible’ (Strathern, 2000), including hurt -
ing personal feelings and inducing forms of pressure and 
even humiliation.
“  We are Javanese. We do want to be open, but 
we don’t want to cross the line and be impolite. 
Transparency and accountability should take into 
account the culture factor. … For Javanese people, 
feeling is important and their feeling will be the 
basis for taking or not taking actions.
A district leader in Indonesia (Felicia, 2018)
Explaining the concept of  
personally identifiable information
Personally identifiable information (PII) includes any infor -
mation that can be used, either alone or in combination with 
other information, to directly determine or ascertain the 
identity of an individual person. PII can include a person’s 
name, Social Security number … other individual identifica-
tion number … address, and so on. It can also include distinct 
pieces of information that, when combined, can identify an 
individual. In the case of student education records, that 
might include a student’s grade level, date of birth, and/or 
other personal information (e.g. gender, race, or ethnicity). 
PII stored in students’ education records is protected by 
federal and state law.
Source: National Forum on Education Statistics, 2016 (available at https://
nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/NFES2016096.pdf).BOX 27Ethics and Corruption in Education163 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
What options exist to address them?
Protecting data privacy in the context of growing national 
databases poses acute problems for public authorities that 
extend far beyond open school data. However, some basic 
rules that apply in other sectors should also be considered 
here. These include developing highly secure systems that 
protect individual data; preventing the disclosure of direct 
identifiers; finding a balance between detailed and aggre -
gated information, with a focus on problem-solving; using 
‘a consistent minimum size for a data group when reporting 
aggregated data so that individual identities cannot be de -
duced from a small number of students’ (National Forum on 
Education Statistics, 2016); making sure that teachers are 
‘not publicly humiliated in the name of accountability’ (Roy 
and Miah, 2018); and finding alternative ways to deal with the 
issue of teacher absenteeism.17
Identified risk How to address it
Data privacy 
and tracking of 
individualsEstablish strong security protocols and measures to 
protect individual data
Prevent the disclosure of direct identifiers
Find a balance between detailed and aggregated 
information
Use a consistent minimum size for a data group when 
reporting aggregated data
Find alternative ways to deal with the issue of teacher 
absenteeism
17 ‘In Kenya, opposition from the National Union of Teachers on this issue, and on the 
introduction of a teaching quality indicator, delayed the start of the project by a year. The NTA 
[National Taxpayers Association] eventually yielded and decided to find other ways of raising 
the issue of teacher absenteeism, including at the public meetings where [school report card] 
findings are discussed’ (Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen, 2019).Ethics and Corruption in Education164 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
5.7. Security issues in fragile contexts
What are the risks?
Few security risks are attached to open school data. 
Nevertheless, two practical examples were evoked during 
the interviews carried out under IIEP-UNESCO’s research on 
open school data. The first came from Pakistan, where one in-
terviewee mentioned possible risks raised by the diffusion of 
school addresses together with the number of students en -
rolled, in reference to the attack conducted against a public 
school in Peshawar in 2014 (Khan, 2018). The second example 
came from the Philippines, where ‘in areas with law-and- 
order problems … information about funds and resources 
could make the school a target for robbery’ (Parafina, 2018).
Examples of data that should not be disclosed
The stakeholders identified at least four types of data the 
public sharing of which should be limited or regulated. These 
are: personal and private information (e.g. personal health 
condition, individual test results, guidance counselling re -
cords); information that poses a danger to people’s lives or 
creates stigma; information that requires official authoriza-
tion (e.g. based on [Department of Education] orders); and 
freedom of information (FOI) exceptions (e.g. for reasons of 
national security).
Source: Parafina, 2018.BOX 28Ethics and Corruption in Education165 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
What options exist to address them?
According to the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child, 
‘States Parties shall ensure that the institutions, services and 
facilities responsible for the care or protection of children 
shall conform with the standards established by competent 
authorities, particularly in the areas of safety, health’. As a 
consequence, in fragile contexts, public authorities should 
carefully assess the sensitivity of school data in relation to 
security issues, and take the decision not to publish them 
when required by the prevailing situation.
Identified risk How to address it
Security issues in fragile 
contextsIdentify data that can lead to security issues, 
and take the decision not to publish them 
when required by the contextEthics and Corruption in Education166 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open school data
Do you see any risks with the publication of school data? 
The  perspective of parents in Bangladesh, Indonesia, and 
the Philippines
Do you see any risks with the 
publication of school data? (%)Bangladesh Indonesia Philippines
Yes  1.6 41.4 24.5
No 98.4 58.6 75.5
Are there data that should not be accessed? The perspective 
of stakeholders in the Philippines
¢ Yes
¢ No100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
 Parents  Teachers  Community leaders
What types of risk do you associate with school data 
publication? The perspective of parents and school 
committee representatives in Indonesia
¢ Parents choosing to enrol their child 
in another school
¢ Inequities between schools 
highlighted
¢ Tensions between school authorities 
and parents/community
¢ Tensions between teachers and 
parents/community
¢ Frustration on behalf of parents/
community who lack the capacity to 
act upon information
¢ Other35.71%
7 .14%
14.29%7 .14%35.71%3.2%
9.5%
7 .1% 35.7%
25.4%16.7%School committee  
representatives Parents
Source : Field survey data collected as part of IIEP-UNESCO’s research on open 
school data in Bangladesh (Roy and Miah, 2018), Indonesia (Felicia, 2018), and the 
Philippines (Parafina, 2018).Ethics and Corruption in Education167 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
In summary: Challenging open school data: What are the 
risks?
What are the 
identified risks?How to address them? 
Over-
simplification of 
complex issuesMitigate the focus on pupils’ results indicators
Diversify data to document one given dimension
Encourage comparisons with standard indicators
Create a socio-educational index that allows for more 
meaningful comparisons between districts or schools
Misinterpretation 
of dataMake school authorities aware of the potential of open 
school data
Build the capacity of stakeholders to analyse data and 
draw useful conclusions
Work with a variety of partners ahead of data 
publication to build trust
School 
competition 
and possible 
stigmatizationReview quality assessment measures
Focus on gain and growth data
Design a comprehensive communication strategy
Work with media prior to data release
Celebrate schools registering high gain and growth
Publish data regularly as a routine (rather than as 
an event)
Empowering the 
empoweredUse different methods to disseminate information
Mobilize civil society organizations to ensure the active 
and effective participation of lower socio-economic 
groups
Prohibit the release of ethnic-based statisticsEthics and Corruption in Education168 iiep.unesco.org
5. Challenging open school data: What are the risks?
What are the 
identified risks?How to address them? 
Power 
imbalances, 
tensions, and 
frustrationsBuild the capacity of all stakeholders to take collective 
decisions based on school data
Ensure strong facilitation of school/community 
meetings
Ensure that the identity of parents or students is kept 
confidential when making complaints
Compel authorities to provide timely responses to 
requests
Data privacy 
and tracking of 
individualsEstablish strong security protocols and measures to 
protect individual data
Prevent the disclosure of direct identifiers
Find a balance between detailed and aggregated 
information
Use a consistent minimum size for a data group when 
reporting aggregated data
Find alternative ways to deal with the issue of teacher 
absenteeism
Security issues in 
fragile contextsIdentify data that can lead to security issues, and take 
the decision not to publish them when required by the 
contextEthics and Corruption in Education169 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for 
designing and implementing open 
school data initiatives
Making school data public is a useful step but not sufficient 
in and of itself to provoke significant changes in education 
systems. A number of other, practical steps must be under -
taken both before and after publication to bring open school 
data to the attention of citizens.
The practical guidelines presented below aim to help plan-
ners of such initiatives to learn from and build on international 
experience in this field. For each of the steps involved, policy 
options are detailed, and tips, warnings, and a few sugges -
tions for future steps are provided in boxes. A checklist 
provided at the end indicates which actor(s) need to be mo -
bilized accordingly.
STEP 1. Design a clear open data policy framework
1. Review motivations for 
an open school data 
policy, clarify roles and 
responsibilities, and set 
expectations.
2. Link open school data 
with the information, 
planning, and 
management systems in place at school level and above, 
in order to amplify their usefulness and sustainability.
3. Formulate a theory of change, building on the collabora-
tive planning imperative and user participation models.Tip
Formally recognize students 
not only as beneficiaries but 
also as users of information 
with their own unique needs 
and interests, perspectives, 
and representation.Ethics and Corruption in Education170 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
4. Pay due attention to the institutional adoption of partici-
patory approaches to strengthen the use of open school 
data, building on the experience of civil society in this 
respect.
5. Allocate sufficient budgetary funds to support imple -
mentation of the open school data policy, including 
dissemination, and training and monitoring activities.
6. Integrate open school data into broader educational poli-
cies and reform frameworks.
STEP 2. Prioritize critical data with greater potential to 
generate positive change
1. Provide contextual in-
formation about school 
locations and socio-  
economic background, 
and include links to other 
sources of information 
(e.g. school development plans).
2. Select meaningful data highlighting the current situation 
of schools, and focus on aspects of specific inputs, pro -
cesses, or outputs with a propensity to hold public and 
school authorities accountable.
3. Accord priority to data that are of direct interest and 
utility for users (e.g.  school budgets, infrastructure, or 
equipment), and which they can act upon.Tip
Be selective in the choice 
of data, focusing on critical 
aspects of schools.Ethics and Corruption in Education171 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
4. Move progressively from input to output indicators, moni-
toring how well pupils are learning.
5. Consider indicators that are comparable over time and 
between schools, and that can measure in reference to na-
tional standards.
6. Include basic information about free or paid services of -
fered by schools, eligibility criteria, amounts for stipends, 
responsibilities of school management committees 
(SMCs), and so on.
7 . Consider incorporating data about current levels of parent 
participation and involvement in school operations.
8. Avoid information related to ethnicity or religion in order to 
minimize the risks of biased analysis and incorrect inter -
pretation of data.
9. Identify data that can lead to security issues, and take the 
decision not to publish them when required by the context.
10. Consult teacher unions, 
parent associations, and 
media prior to data re -
lease, and discuss the 
results with them, as well 
as the most appropriate 
messages to be commu-
nicated to the general 
public on this basis.Future step
Given the expansion of 
private schools in most 
countries, incorporate 
into the database private 
schools recognized by 
public authorities.Ethics and Corruption in Education172 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
STEP 3. Set up robust information management systems
1. Plan the introduction of 
open school data initi-
atives in synergy with 
existing educational 
management information 
systems (EMIS), making 
sure that data are kept 
under the ownership of 
public authorities.
2. Diversify sources of information, and minimize the number 
of administrative levels and individuals involved in data 
collection to protect data accuracy.
3. Organize technical training for local staff to teach them 
how to monitor data on a continuous basis and undertake 
data checks and audits.
4. Update the database in real time, several times a year, 
taking advantage of new opportunities offered by data 
digitization and synchronization.
5. Reduce time lags between data collection and publication, 
and disseminate information in a timely manner.
6. Empower school actors (including pupils) and community 
members in data collection processes.Future step
Design one presentation for 
computers, and another for 
mobile devices and tablets 
with simplified charts and 
tables.Ethics and Corruption in Education173 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
7 . Release data several times a year to lessen tensions 
generated by annual data releases.
8. Make sure online data are in compliance with norms of 
accessibility for the disabled.
9. Facilitate the indexing of 
open data platforms by 
internet search engines.
10. Make sure that individual 
data are fully protected, 
and that no tracking of 
individuals is undertaken 
using the information collected.
STEP 4. Explore attractive ways to present data
1. Make sure data are ac -
cessible both online and 
offline in public areas 
where they are easy for all 
to view (e.g. at the school 
entrance and/or on the 
school noticeboard).
2. Provide explanations for statistical concepts to avoid 
confusion or misinterpretation.
3. Prevent the disclosure of direct identifiers, and use a 
consistent minimum size for a data group when reporting 
aggregated data.Warning
When integrating large 
databases (e.g. with teacher 
and/or student data), make 
sure that individual data 
protection is guaranteed.
Tip
Maintain the technical 
accuracy of data and 
avoid oversimplification 
and consequent 
misinterpretation.Ethics and Corruption in Education174 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
4. Use simple language and attractive design, and incorpo -
rate tables and graphics that are easy for all to understand.
5. Use time series to encourage data analysis over time, high-
lighting the journey of schools over time.
6. Enable comparisons with national standards, and possibly 
also with other schools, but only those sharing similar socio- 
educational characteristics to avoid misinterpretation.
7 . Give users the possibility of accessing different levels 
of data presentation, ranging from simple levels to more 
detailed and complex ones.
8. Share successful experiences of high-gain schools, and 
analyse how they were able to achieve their results.
9. Survey users, inquiring 
about the clarity of the 
information provided and 
its usefulness.Future step
Develop interactive tools to 
allow users to move from 
simple to complex data 
presentations.Ethics and Corruption in Education175 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
STEP 5. Make sure data are accessible to all
1. Send school report cards 
formally to all school 
principals.
2. Adopt legal provisions re -
garding the disclosure of 
school data, and moni -
tor their enforcement by 
school authorities.
3. Conduct advocacy campaigns in local languages to make 
citizens aware of open school data, using radio, newspa-
pers, public banners, school letters, and other media.
4. Transmit data directly to the public (e.g. through the distri-
bution of leaflets or parent information sheets). In illiterate 
or semi-literate contexts, read the data out loud during 
community meetings.
5. Communicate and discuss data openly during SMC, parent, 
and/or community gatherings (particularly mothers’ 
gatherings), and assist attendees in understanding, 
interpreting, and acting upon them.
6. Use small group discussions to ensure the participation of 
community members whose voices may not otherwise be 
heard.
7. Consider innovative means of data dissemination (e.g. multi-
media, drama, folk songs, dance enactments) that can be 
understood by illiterate parents.Future step
Introduce a separate venue 
for students, where they 
can ask about, comment on, 
or discuss issues related to 
open school data.Ethics and Corruption in Education176 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
STEP 6. Strengthen stakeholder capacities to act on 
information
1. Enhance awareness 
among school adminis -
trators and teachers of 
the core principles of 
open school data and 
public right to informa-
tion, and how to enforce 
them in practice.
2. Organize training for school principals, teachers, and SMC 
members on how to analyse simple statistics, and take 
evidence-based decisions on this basis.
3. Inform citizens about their rights and entitlements about 
education, as well as their rights to be informed, comment 
on information, and formulate proposals.
4. Provide instructions to SMC members on the importance 
of school-level data and take their concerns forward to 
school authorities and higher administrative levels, as 
needed.
5. With the support of civil society and community organ-
izations, train SMC members and selected parents (e.g. 
members of mothers’ groups) on the practical use of open 
school data, highlighting good practices.Tip
Don’t brief parents only 
about their duties; share 
information about the 
school and the importance 
of their participation in 
school activities.Ethics and Corruption in Education177 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
6. Issue guidance on the organization of open school data 
meetings and subsequent follow-up to increase the re -
sponsiveness and accountability of school authorities to 
all stakeholders.
7 . Use existing platforms such as community meetings 
as mediums to establish roles and responsibilities, and 
define follow-up actions collectively in the presence of all 
stakeholders.
8. Organize information sessions for all pupils (not just pupil 
leaders) about the importance of open school data, for in-
stance at the beginning of the academic year.
9. Give due recognition to 
active individuals con -
tributing to open data 
initiatives at school level 
(particularly mothers).Tip
Use existing consultation 
and training structures to 
increase open school data 
sustainability.Ethics and Corruption in Education178 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
STEP 7. Support efforts to improve accountability and fight 
corruption
1. Make sure that public di-
alogue feeds into school 
improvement plans and 
remedial measures, and 
ensure that it is integrat -
ed into school culture.
2. Identify areas that are 
most vulnerable to 
corrupt practices, and 
select data that can help shed light on them.
3. Place the emphasis on input tracking to increase the 
impact of open school data on corruption-related issues 
(e.g. fund leakage or ghost teachers).
4. Make the objectives of an open school data initiative 
evolve over time from an information and communication 
tool to an accountability and anti-corruption tool.
5. Engage civil society members and communities to inquire 
into corrupt practices, such as fund embezzlement or mis -
allocation of equipment or textbooks.
6. Clarify the consequences for corrupt acts, provide legal 
advice upon request, introduce hotlines and/or complaint 
mechanisms, and take sanctions whenever appropriate.
7 . Ensure that the identity of parents or students is kept con -
fidential when making complaints.Tip
Integrate transparency and 
anti-corruption efforts into 
strategies or blueprints for 
school improvement efforts, 
rather than maintaining 
them as a separate 
programme.Ethics and Corruption in Education179 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
Checklist
Step What Who
1.  Design a 
clear open 
data policy 
frameworkReview motivations, clarify 
roles and responsibilities, 
and set expectations by 
formulating a theory of 
change in line with the 
planning cycle. Ensure buy-
in, consider incentives and 
remedial measures, and build 
on participatory approaches.Central education 
authorities
2.  Prioritize 
critical data 
with greater 
potential 
to generate 
positive 
changesBe selective and take into 
account data of relevance for 
users, with potential to hold 
public and school authorities 
accountable. Consider data 
related to input, process and 
outputs that are comparable 
over time and schools, 
but also linked to parental 
participation.Central education 
authorities
Teacher unions
Parent associations
Civil society
3.  Set up robust 
information 
management 
systemsBuild on EMIS to develop a 
database, and ensure the 
quality, comparability, and 
accuracy of data. Digitize and 
synchronize data to reduce 
errors and time lags. Consider 
the involvement of users in 
data collection.Central and 
local education 
authorities
4.  Explore 
attractive 
ways to 
present dataSet up online and offline 
channels to access data, 
paying attention to data 
understanding. Enable 
comparisons over time against 
standards and between 
schools sharing similar 
features. Imagine innovative 
communication media.Central and 
local education 
authorities
Civil societyEthics and Corruption in Education180 iiep.unesco.org
6. Practical guidelines for designing and  
implementing open school data initiatives
Step What Who
5.  Make sure 
data are 
accessible 
to allAdopt legal provisions on 
school data disclosure and 
conduct advocacy campaigns. 
Use various communication 
channels and organize 
community gatherings to 
discuss data and strategies for 
improvements.Central and 
local education 
authorities
Media
Civil society
School authorities
6.  Strengthen 
stakeholder 
capacities 
to act on 
informationTrain school administrators, 
teachers, and SMC members, 
as well as selected parents, 
in the importance and use of 
open school data. Organize 
meetings with citizens to 
discuss possible actions.Central and 
local education 
authorities
School authorities
SMCs
Parents
Pupils
Communities
Civil society
7 .  Support 
efforts to 
improve 
accountability 
and fight 
corruptionPlace an emphasis on input 
tracking and corruption risks 
when selecting data. Engage 
stakeholders to inquire into 
illegal practices and introduce 
hotlines and complaint 
mechanisms.Central and 
local education 
authorities
Parents
Communities
Civil society
Judiciary Ethics and Corruption in Education181 iiep.unesco.org
References
Anderson, J. 2005. Accountability in Education . Education 
Policy Series, No 1. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000140986/PDF/140986eng.pdf.multi
Barr, A.; Packard, T .; Serra, D. 2014. ‘Participatory account -
ability and collective action: Experimental evidence from 
Albania’. In: European Economic Review, 68 (C), 250-269.
Bautista, C.R.B. (ed.).  2005. Transforming Education on the 
Ground: Fifty Stories of School-based Management Under 
the Third Elementary Education Project. Manila: Philippines 
Department of Education.
Bordoloi, M.; Kapoor, V. 2018. India: Using Open School Data 
to Improve Transparency and Accountability. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265933/PDF/265933eng.pdf.multi
Brito, A. 2019. Información y transparencia: cuadros de indi-
cadores de las escuelas en América Latina. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000370474/PDF/370474spa.pdf.multi
Bruns, B.; Filmer, D.; Patrinos, H. 2011. Making Schools Work: 
New Evidence on Accountability Reforms. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.
Cheng, Y.C. 1996. School Effectiveness and School-based 
Management: A Mechanism for Development. London: The 
Falmer Press. Quoted by Abu Duhou, I. 1999. School-based 
Management. Series: Fundamentals of Educational Planning, 
No. 62. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
Cheng, X.J.; Moses, K. 2016. Promoting Transparency through 
Information: A Global Review of School Report Cards. Series: Ethics and Corruption in Education182 iiep.unesco.org
References
Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.  
Available on UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000246358/PDF/246358eng.pdf.multi
Data Revolution Group. 2014. A World That Counts: Mobilising 
the Data Revolution for Sustainable Development. Report pre -
pared at the request of the United Nations Secretary-General, 
by the Independent Expert Advisory Group.
Dupain, J.; Thu Phuong Nguyen, L. 2019. Information and 
Transparency: School Report Cards in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Series: Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-
UNESCO. Available on UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000367723/PDF/367723eng.pdf.
multi
Felicia, N. 2018. Indonesia: Using Open School Data to 
Improve Transparency and Accountability. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265934/PDF/265934eng.pdf.multi
Figlio, D.; Kenny, L.  2009. ‘Public sector performance mea-
surement and stakeholder support’. In: Journal of Public 
Economics, 93 (9-10), 1069- 1077 .
Gurstein, M.B.  2011. ‘Open data: Empowering the empowered 
or effective data use for everyone?’. In: First Monday, 16(2). 
Online Journal. 
Hallak, J.; Poisson, M.  2007. Corrupt Schools, Corrupt 
Universities: What Can Be Done? Series: Ethics and Corruption 
in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on UNESCO’s web -
site: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000150259/
PDF/150259eng.pdf.multi
Hood, C. 1991. ‘A public management for all seasons?’ In: 
Public Administration , 69(1), 3- 19.Ethics and Corruption in Education183 iiep.unesco.org
References
Karim, S.; Santizo Rodall, C.A.; Cabrero Mendoza, E. 2004. 
Transparency in Education : Report Card in Bangladesh. Quality 
Schools Programme in Mexico . Series: Ethics and Corruption in 
Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on UNESCO’s web -
site: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000139031/
PDF/139031eng.pdf.multi
Khan, K. 2018. Punjab, Pakistan: Using Open School Data to 
Improve Transparency and Accountability. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265937?posInSet=1&queryId=9b4dc2d8-5d3c-407b
-afe7-d90f3596a0f4
Lassibille, G.; Tan, J.P .; Jesse, C.; Thu Phuong Nguyen, L. 2010. 
‘Managing for results in primary education in Madagascar: 
Evaluating the impact of selected workflow interventions’. In: 
World Bank Economic Review, 24 (2), 303-329.
Levacic, R.; Downes, P .; Caldwell, B.J.; Gurr, D.; Spinks, J.M.; 
Herczynski, J.; Luce, M.B.; Farenzena, N. 2004. Formula 
Funding of Schools, Decentralization and Corruption . Series: 
Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. 
Available on UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000137631/PDF/137631eng.pdf.multi 
Link (Link Community Development).  2017 . Mid-term 
Evaluation: INSPIRE Project, Malawi. Lilongwe: Link.
National Forum on Education Statistics. 2016. Forum Guide 
to Education Data Privacy. NFES 2016-096. US Department 
of Education. Washington, DC: National Center for Education 
Statistics, NFES.
Parafina, R.S.  2018. Philippines: Using Open School Data to 
Improve Transparency and Accountability. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on Ethics and Corruption in Education184 iiep.unesco.org
References
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265938/PDF/265938eng.pdf.multi
Rabinowitz, S. 2018. Australia: Using Open School Data to 
Improve Transparency and Accountability. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265929/PDF/265929eng.pdf.multi
Read, L.; Atinc, T .M.  2017 . ‘Information for accountabil -
ity: Transparency and citizen engagement for improved 
service delivery in education systems’. Global Economy 
& Development Working Paper 99. Washington, DC: The 
Brookings Institution.
Reinikka, R.; Smith, N. 2004. Public Expenditure Tracking 
Surveys in Education: Peru, Uganda and Zambia . Series: Ethics 
and Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.  Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000136267/PDF/136267eng.pdf.multi
Roy, D.; Miah, A.S.J. 2018. Bangladesh: Using Open School Data 
to Improve Transparency and Accountability. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.  Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265930/PDF/265930eng.pdf.multi
SPACO (Strategy for Poverty Alleviation Co-ordination 
Office).  2004. Operational Manual for Community Based 
Monitoring. Banjul: World Bank.
Stapenhurst, R.; O’Brien, M. 2008. ‘Accountability in govern-
ance’. World Bank PREM Note No 4. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.
Strathern, M.  2000. ‘The tyranny of transparency’. In: British 
Journal of Educational Technology. 26 (3), 309-321.
UN General Assembly. 1989. Convention on the Rights of 
the Child. Adopted and opened for signature, ratification Ethics and Corruption in Education185 iiep.unesco.org
References
and accession by General Assembly resolution 44/25 of 20 
November 1989, entry into force 2 September 1990.
UNESCO. 2008. Education for All by 2015: Will We Make It? EFA 
Global Monitoring Report, 2008. Paris: UNESCO. Available on 
UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000154820/PDF/154820eng.pdf.multi
————. 2017. Accountability in Education: Meeting our 
Commitments. Global Education Monitoring Report, 2017/18. 
Global Education Monitoring Report Team. Paris: UNESCO. 
Available on UNESCO’s website: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000259338/PDF/259338eng.pdf.multi
————. 2020. ‘Freedom of Information’. Communication 
and Information Sector. Available on UNESCO’s website: 
www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/
freedom-of-expression/freedom-of-information//
UNESCO-UIS. 2018. Quick Guide to Education Indicators for 
SDG 4. Montreal, Canada: UIS. Available on UNESCO’s web -
site: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000265396/
PDF/265396eng.pdf.multi
Vignieri, V. 2018. ‘Performance management in the pub -
lic sector’. In: Farazmand A. (ed.), Global Encyclopedia of 
Public Administration, Public Policy, and Governance . Cham, 
Switzerland: Springer.
World Bank.  2003. World Development Report 2004: Making 
Services Work for Poor People. Washington, DC: World Bank 
and Oxford University Press.
————. 2017 . Implementation Completion and Result Report 
(TF-13140) on a Global Partnership for Education Fund Grant to 
the Republic of Ghana. Washington, DC: World Bank.Ethics and Corruption in Education186 iiep.unesco.org
Glossary of terms
Access to public information: mechanisms by which citizens 
can exercise their right to access government information.
Accountability: holding public officials and service providers 
answerable for educational processes and outcomes. 
Bottom-up process: a process by which the collection and 
distribution of school information is initiated at community 
level. 
Citizen report card:  summary results of a public service 
user satisfaction survey, intended to provide information for 
authorities and communities on service availability, delivery, 
and efficiency.
Community scorecard:  collation of public service users’ 
subjective assessments of inputs, processes, and outputs, 
collected through a participatory process involving schools 
and communities.
Corruption:  systematic use of public office for personal gain, 
which has detrimental effects on access, quality, or equity in 
education.
Digitalization:   transformation of administrative processes 
due to the intensive use of digital technologies.
Digitization:  process of converting information or data into a 
computer-readable format using a sequence of discrete values.
Electronic government:  use of new information technologies 
in the public sector for internal and external transactions.
Formal reward and sanction model:   model by which 
education authorities use formal rewards and sanctions to 
promote school accountability. 
Input tracking matrix:  an intermediate product aggregating 
information on school inputs, processes, and/or outputs, 
involving community participation as part of the development 
of scorecards.Ethics and Corruption in Education187 iiep.unesco.org
Glossary of terms
League tables: ranking of schools based on school performance 
results in standardized learning assessments.
Market model: model in which market incentives are used to 
promote school accountability. 
National education standards:  minimum standards to be 
achieved by schools in terms of inputs, processes, and/or 
outputs.
Open data policy: policy by which data generated by the 
government are made public in formats suitable for reuse and 
exploitation by citizens.
Open government:   the opening up within the education 
sector of government data, processes, decisions, and control 
mechanisms to public involvement and scrutiny, with a view 
to ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education.
Open school data:   all information about school inputs, 
processes, and/or outputs shared with the general public, 
either in paper or electronic format.
Participatory school report cards:  school report cards 
developed by community members with the support of civil 
society organizations, focused on expressed needs.
Public participation model:  model by which accountability is 
generated by public participation in school monitoring. 
Report card: aggregation of information on educational inputs, 
processes, and/or outputs at school, district, or regional level, 
intended for internal and/or external use.
School community:  people who make up an educational 
institution (i.e.  school principals, administrative staff, 
teachers, parents, students, and other people who participate 
in school life).
School-education index: composite score based on several 
indicators (e.g.  student learning outcomes and education Ethics and Corruption in Education188 iiep.unesco.org
Glossary of terms
efficiency for each school), enabling users to compare 
schools and assess how a school evolves over time.
School improvement plan:  plan prepared by school authorities 
in consultation with school management committees (SMCs) 
and also, in some cases, parents and community members, 
to improve school results. It includes objectives, activities, a 
timetable, the persons in charge, and monitoring indicators.
School profile:  combination of quantitative and qualitative 
information that provides an overall picture of school 
operation and quality in a report format.
School report card: aggregation of information on a school’s 
inputs, processes, and/or outputs, intended for internal and/
or external use. 
School scorecards:  school scores presented through a 
numerical or letter scale based on a list of predetermined 
criteria selected to represent school performance or progress. 
Scorecards: school performance or progress scores ex pressed 
on a numerical or letter scale based on a list of predetermined 
criteria.
Social accountability: approach through which citizens and/
or civil society organizations participate in holding public and 
school authorities to account.
Standardized school report cards: document presenting the 
results obtained by schools on a set of indicators that remain 
the same across schools.
Top-down process:  process by which the collection and 
distribution of school-level information is initiated by central 
authorities. 
Transparency: information that is easy to understand and 
simple to access by all stakeholders on all flows of educational 
resources, processes, and outcomes.Ethics and Corruption in Education189 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Appendix 1. Experiences in open school data initiatives 
worldwide
Focus on Africa
Country Name of project/initiative Implementors
Ethiopia School performance review 
report (under Improved Girls’ 
Learning in Rural Wolaita) Link
Ethiopia Community scorecard 
(under the Ethiopian Social 
Accountability Program) World Bank (WB), 
UK Department 
for International 
Development (DFID), GIZ, 
Canadian International 
Development Agency 
(CIDA), Association of 
Netherlands Municipalities 
(VNG), local civil society 
organizations (CSOs) 
Gambia Community scorecard (under 
the Accountability and 
Participatory Monitoring and 
Evaluation Program)WB
Gambia Community report card 
(under the Participatory 
Performance Monitoring 
programme)Ministry of Education, WB, 
Global Partnership for 
Education (GPE)
Ghana School Performance Review Link, Voluntary Service 
Overseas 
Ghana School Report Card, then 
Mobile School Report CardMinistry of Education, US 
Agency for International 
Development (USAID), WB, 
United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF)
Ghana Community scorecard Northern Ghana Network 
for DevelopmentEthics and Corruption in Education190 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Country Name of project/initiative Implementors
Kenya School Report Card CIDA, DFID, UK Aid, 
Hewlett Foundation, 
National Taxpayers 
Association (NTA)
Madagascar School Report Card (under 
AGEPA then AGEMAD 
initiative)WB, Agence française de 
développement (AFD), 
Aide et Action
Madagascar School profiles (under Data 
Must Speak programme)Ministry of Education, 
GPE, UNICEF, Hewlett 
Foundation, IIEP-UNESCO 
Dakar 
Malawi Community School Report 
Card (under SSIM, then 
INSPIRE)Link
Namibia School self-assessment Ministry of Basic 
Education, Sport and 
Culture, Academy for 
Educational Development, 
USAID
Niger School Report Card (under 
AGEPA)Ministry of Education, WB, 
AFD
Nigeria Citizen Report Cards LITE
Rwanda Community scorecard (under 
the Public Policy Information 
Monitoring and Advocacy 
programme)DFID, Swedish 
International Development 
Cooperation (SIDA), 
Norwegian People’s 
Aid and local 
non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs)
Rwanda Community scorecard 
(under the Nine Year Basic 
Education programme) Transparency International 
(TI) Rwanda
Tanzania Community scorecard 
(under the Governance and 
Accountability Program) CIDA, CARE, and local 
NGOs Ethics and Corruption in Education191 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Country Name of project/initiative Implementors
Togo School profiles (under Data 
Must Speak programme)Ministry of Education, 
GPE, UNICEF, Hewlett 
Foundation, IIEP-UNESCO 
Dakar 
Uganda Community scorecard (under 
the Citizen Voice and Action 
initiative)World Vision
Zambia School profiles (under Data 
Must Speak programme)Ministry of Education, 
GPE, UNICEF, Hewlett 
Foundation, IIEP-UNESCO 
Dakar 
Zambia Noticeboards (under Zambia 
Accountability Program)British Council and Zambia 
National Education 
Coalition 
Source : Dupain and Thu Phuong Nguyen, 2019; Cheng and Moses, 2016.Ethics and Corruption in Education192 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Focus on Asia and the Pacific
Country Name of project/initiative Implementors
Australia My School ACARA
Bangladesh School Report Cards Directorate of Primary 
Education, Ministry 
of Primary and Mass 
Education
Bangladesh TIB School Report Cards Transparency 
International Bangladesh 
(TIB)
India Unified District Information 
System for Education 
(U-DISE)National Institute of 
Educational Planning and 
Administration
India Annual Status of Education 
Report (ASER)Pratham 
Indonesia Sekola Kita Federal Government
Indonesia Cek Sekolahku Transparency 
International Indonesia 
(TII)
Pakistan Programme Monitoring and 
Implementation Unit (PMIU)Government of Punjab, 
World Bank
Pakistan ASER Pratham 
Philippines School Report Cards and 
Transparency BoardsDepartment of Education
Philippines CheckMySchool Affiliated Network for 
Social Accountability 
(ANSA)
Source : Rabinowitz, 2018; Roy and Miah, 2018; Bordoloi and Kapoor, 2018; Felicia, 2018; 
Khan, 2018; Parafina, 2018.Ethics and Corruption in Education193 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Focus on Latin America
Country Name of project/initiative Implementors
Argentina Reportes de escuela en 
JujuyProvincial public 
authority
Brazil Basic Education 
Development IndexFederal Ministry of 
Education
Colombia Índice Sintético de Calidad 
Educativa (ISCE)Instituto de Evaluación 
(ICFES), Ministry of 
Education 
Dominican Rep. Sistema de Análisis de 
Indicadores Educativos y 
Alerta TempranaMinistry of Education
Guatemala Ficha Escolar Ministry of Education
Mexico School Report Card Federal Ministry of 
Education
Mexico Mejora tu Escuela Instituto Mexicano para 
la Competitividad (IMCO)
Peru Semáforo Escuela Ministry of Education
Peru Edu-Q Card Edukans 
Source : Brito, 2019.Ethics and Corruption in Education194 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Appendix 2. Content of U-DISE school report cards in India
Data/information 
headContent
1. General
informationBasics: category (primary, middle, secondary, 
etc.) of school, management (private or public, 
aided or unaided), medium of instruction, year of 
establishment, recognition, and up-gradation
Location of school: constituency and geographic 
indicators, and approachability by road
Monitoring: number of inspections by block or cluster 
resource centre officers, academic inspections
Financial grants: Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan or SSA 
(maintenance, development, teacher learning 
material [TLM]), Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha 
Abhiyan (civil works, annual grant, others)
2. Staff 
informationSchool staff information: number of sanctioned 
posts, number of permanent posts vis-à-vis 
contractual positions
Teacher specific: total number of qualified teachers, 
number of graduates, gender, seniority (number 
of teachers above age 55), number of part-time 
teachers
Training: teaching children with special needs, 
computer use, number of teachers who received in-
service training
Non-teaching assignments: number of teachers 
involved, average working days spentEthics and Corruption in Education195 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Data/information 
headContent
3. School 
building,
facilities, and
equipmentSchool facilities: availability of computer-aided 
learning lab, number of computers, internet facility, 
science lab, boundary wall, furniture, playground, 
number of toilet seats (for boys and girls), CWSN-
friendly toilet, library and number of books
Number of rooms: number of classrooms, room for 
headmaster, number of classrooms that require minor 
and major repair
Utilities: electricity connection, drinking water 
facility
Facilities for the disabled: ramps, handrails for ramps
Medical check-ups for students
4. Enrolment Data on enrolment by grade (number of students): 
categorized by sex, caste status, religion (Muslim), 
repeaters, CWSN
5. Incentives Number of textbooks and uniforms given to students 
during previous academic year (categorized by 
primary or secondary, gender, caste, and religion 
[Muslim])
6. Examination
resultsNumber of students enrolled, appeared, passed, and 
passed with more than 60 per cent in the previous 
academic year, categorized by grade, gender, and 
casteEthics and Corruption in Education196 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Data/information 
headContent
7 . Proportions,
percentagesEnrolment: percentage girls enrolment, percentage 
Muslim girls to Muslim enrolment, percentage 
Muslim enrolment, percentage Scheduled Castes 
(SC) girls to SC enrolment, percentage SC enrolment, 
percentage Scheduled Tribes (ST) girls to ST 
enrolment, percentage ST enrolment, percentage 
Other Backward Classes (OBC) enrolment, 
percentage repeaters to total enrolment, percentage 
change in enrolment over previous year
Students and teachers: percentage of teachers 
with professional qualification, pupil/teacher ratio, 
student classroom ratio
Transition rates (primary to upper primary, upper 
primary to secondary, etc.), flow rates (promotion and 
repetition)
Percentage of classrooms requiring major repair
8. Right To 
Education Act 
(RTE)Number of instructional days, school hours for 
children, school hours for teachers (categorized 
by primary, upper primary, secondary), when the 
academic session starts
Textbooks: whether received, when they were 
received (month)
Records: pupil cumulative records maintained, pupil 
cumulative records shared with parents
Status of implementation of Continuous and 
Comprehensive Evaluation in school
9. Children from
Economically 
Weaker Sections 
(EWSs) admitted
(only for private
unaided schools)Data on number of students under 25 per cent quota 
as per RTE in the current academic year, and the 
same for the previous academic yearEthics and Corruption in Education197 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Data/information 
headContent
10. SMC (only for 
government and 
aided schools)Data on when the SMC was constituted
Data on members: number of representatives of local 
authority, parents, guardians, and parent–teacher 
association members (categorized by sex)
Functioning: data on number of SMC meetings in the 
previous academic year, school development plan 
prepared by SMC, whether the SMC has a separate 
account, Indian Financial System Code
11. Special 
training (only 
for government 
schools)Child specific: data on number of children who were 
enrolled for, were provided, and completed special 
training in the previous academic year (categorized 
by sex), percentage of children who completed 
special training in the previous academic year
Other details: data on who conducted it and when it 
was conducted
12. Teacher 
learning
Material (TLM)Data on complete textbooks received, TLM, play 
material, games and sports equipment available for 
each grade (categorized by primary, upper primary, 
etc.)
13. Midday Meal 
Scheme (MDM)
(only for 
government and 
aided schools)Data on the source of, status of MDM, and status of 
kitchen-shed
Source : http://schoolreportcards.in/Ethics and Corruption in Education198 iiep.unesco.org
Appendices
Appendix 3. Complaint handling procedures for 
Cek Sekolahku in Indonesia
Source : Cek Sekolahku website, http://ceksekolahku.or.id/media/3_SOP_English.pdf , 
quoted by Felicia, 2018.Complaints via:
• SMS
• Email
• Online form
• Offline form Student/teacher/public >> Intermediaries/ School Principal /
 informant School Agent District Leader
Verification
(max. 5 days)
Recorded in 
the list of new 
complaintsComplaint 
cannot be 
processed
Clarification/
Follow-up 
informationContinue the 
complaintsValid/  
Correct
Complaint resolved 
(max. 10 days without 
any response from 
informant)Discuss the 
complaints in 
monthly school-
intermediary 
forumFormulate 
follow-up 
actions  
(max. 10 days)Complaint 
dispositionAutofilter
Continue the 
complaintsYesNo
Yes No
YesNoComplaint 
review and 
updates for the 
schoolEthics and Corruption in Education199 iiep.unesco.org
In the same series
Cartographie des risques de corruption dans le secteur de l’éducation en  
Guinée
Muriel Poisson 
Información y transparencia: Cuadros de indicadores de las escuelas en 
América Latina
Alejandra Brito
Information and transparency: School report cards in sub-Saharan Africa
Jonathan Dupain; Lena Thu Phuong Nguyen
Australia: Using open school data to improve transparency and accountability
Stanley Rabinowitz
Bangladesh: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability 
Dipu Roy; Abu Said Md. Juel Miah
India: Using open school data to improve transparency and accountability 
Mridusmita Bordoloi; Varun Kapoor
Indonesia: Using open school data to improve transparency and accountability 
Nisa Felicia
Punjab, Pakistan: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability  
Kashmali Khanà
Philippines: Using open school data to improve transparency and 
accountability
Redempto S. Parafina
Corruption-risk assessment of the Georgian higher education sector 
Muriel Poisson; Jacques Hallak
Promoting transparency through information: A global review of school re -
port cards 
Xuejiao Joy Cheng; Kurt Moses
Achieving transparency in pro-poor education incentives
Muriel Poisson (ed.)
Patterns of development and use of codes of conduct for teachers in 24 
countries 
Pippa McKelvie-Sebileau
Guidelines for the design and effective use of teacher codes of conduct
Muriel PoissonEthics and Corruption in Education200 iiep.unesco.org
Teacher codes: Learning from experience
Shirley van Nuland
Transparency in education in Eastern Europe 
Arunas Plikšnys; Sylvia Kopnicka; Liliya Hrynevych; Constantine Palicarsky
Corrupt schools, corrupt universities: What can be done? 
Jacques Hallak; Muriel Poisson
Ethics in education: The role of teacher codes. Canada and South Asia
Shirley van Nuland; B.P. Khandelwal
Governance in education: Transparency and accountability
Jacques Hallak; Muriel Poisson (eds)
Towards more transparent financial management: Scholarships and grants 
in Indonesia
Stephan Baines
Transparencia en educación: Maestros en Colombia, Alimentación escolar 
en Chile
Margarita Pena and Jeannette S. Rodríguez; Carmen Luz Latorre and Paula 
Aranda
Formula funding of schools, decentralization and corruption: A comparative 
analysis
Rosalind Levačić; Peter Downes
Public expenditure tracking surveys in education 
Ritva Reinikka; Nathanael Smith
Transparency in education: Report card in Bangladesh, quality schools pro -
gramme in Mexico
Shahnaz Karim; Claudia A. Santizo Rodall; Enrique Cabrero Mendoza
Adverse effects of private supplementary tutoring: dimensions, implica-
tions and government responses 
Mark Bray
Approvisionnement en livres scolaires: Vers plus de transparence. Afrique 
francophone 
Jean-Pierre Leguéré
Combating academic fraud: Towards a culture of integrity
Max A. EcksteinMuriel Poisson Open School Data: What Planners Need to Know IIEP-UNESCOAbout the book
The number of countries providing the general  public 
with access to educational data has grown rapidly 
over the past decade, encouraged by new information 
 technologies and citizens’ growing pressure for more 
transparency.
But while an increased amount of school-level infor -
mation is shared in either paper or electronic format, 
several questions emerge: What are the most critical 
data to publish? What format is most likely to encourage 
communities to make use of them? How can we  foster 
the active engagement of citizens? What actions are 
required to close the accountability loop? What are the 
major risks attached to the opening up of  information?
This publication responds to these questions, unpack -
ing the chain of actions required for developing open 
school data successfully. It argues that decision- makers 
and educational planners need to change from an ad-
ministrative to a citizen perspective, learning from civil 
society experience in the area. Overall, the book demon-
strates that by stimulating expectations and hopes, 
open school data may well contribute to  substantial 
changes in power dynamics within the education sector.
About the author
Muriel Poisson is a Programme Specialist at IIEP- 
UNESCO, in charge of the Institute’s project on ‘Ethics 
and Corruption in Education’. She is responsible for re -
search and training activities in this area, on subjects 
including public expenditure tracking surveys, teacher 
codes of conduct, transparency in the management of 
pro-poor incentives, academic integrity, open school 
data, and open government in education.
ISBN: 978-92-803-1446-5