COVID 19, 
technology-based 
education 
and disability:  
The case of Bangladesh
Emerging practices in inclusive 
digital learning for students 
with disabilitiesTypesetting: IP Guslisty 
Photo credits: a2i, YPSA
The views and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent those of UNESCO or IIEP-UNESCO. The designations employed and the presentation of material do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on
 
the part of UNESCO or 
IIEP-UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area, or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries.
This publication was produced by UNESCO, in the context of the Global Programme Supporting Disability Inclusive Covid-19 Response and Recovery at National Level supported by the United Nations Partnership on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNPRPD) Multi Partner Trust Fund.
International Institutefor Educational Planning
© UNESCO 20213
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshContents
Acknowledgements 5
List of bo
xes
 6
Abbr
eviations and acronyms
 7
Overvie
w
8
Key implementers
 9
a2i – Access to Information  9
YPSA – Y
oung Power in Social Action 9
Partnerships
10
Impact of COVID-19 on disability-inclusive education in Bangladesh  11
Liter
ature review
 12
Overall prevalence of disability  12
Pr
evalence of disability among children and young people 12
National laws and policies on disability
 12
Disability inclusion in education policies
 13
Disability inclusion in ICT policies
 13
Backgr
ound and current status of the ARM initiative 
 13
Objectives and methodology  15
Objectives 15
Methodology
15
Findings 16
Relevance and appropriateness  17
Effectiveness 
 18
Efficiency	 18
Impact 
 19
Sustainability 21
Other factors 
 22
Barriers encountered with the ARM initiative  23
Common barriers:  23
Barriers
	
specific
	
to
	
COVID-19:	 23
Recommendations 24
Conclusion 25
Other initiatives that complement ARM 26
Education 	through	TV	broadcast 	(Sangsad+EduSkills)	 26
Education thr
ough social media (Facebook Live and YouTube)
 27
Community r
adio–based classes
 28
MuktoPaath e-learning platform
 29
Emporia web platform and mobile application
 30
Empo
werment of Persons with Disabilities including NDD [Neurodevelopmental
 
Disabilities] through ICT
 31
Synchr
onous learning management system (LMS) for tertiary education and training      31
References 32
Glossary
34
Appendices
35
Appendix 1. Documents reviewed  35
Appendix 2. Or
ganizations consulted for the research
 35
Appendix
	
3.
	
Participants
	
–
	
Key
	
informant
	
interviews
	
and
	
focus
	
group
	
discussions	 36
About the authors 384
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshA student with a visual impairment using a smartphone to read accessible books.
5
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshAcknowledgements
The research would not have been possible without the contributions of key informants from the Min-
istry of Education, Department of Social Service of the Ministry of Social Welfare, a2i of the ICT Division, 
the non-governmental organization Young Power in Social Action, the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, the DAISY Consortium, the Accessible Book Consortium of the World Intellectual Property Organi-
zation,	the	Primary	Education	 Development	 Programme	 4,	Bangladesh’s	 Visually	Impaired	 People’s	Society,	
the Government’s Teachers’ Training College, and the Disabled Students’ Society of Chittagong University. 
We also thank the participants of the focus group discussions (persons with disabilities and representatives 
of OPDs, NGOs, CSOs, INGOs, students, teachers and a parent group) for their contribution to this study. Our 
deepest appreciation goes to UNESCO’s International Institute for Educational Planning for giving us the op-
portunity to engage in this timely research and for providing constant support and constructive feedback.6
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshList of boxes
Box 1.1 Research themes and questions
Box 1.2 Case study of Md.Shakil Khan, a student with visual impairment7
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshAbbreviations and acronyms
a2i Access to Information/Aspire to Innovate
ABC Accessible Book Consortium
ARM Accessible Reading Materials
BBS Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
BRAC Building Resources across Communities
CSO civil society organization
CRC  Convention on the Rights of the Child 
CRPD Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
DAISY Digital Accessible Information System
DISSCU Disabled Students’ Society of Chittagong University
DSS Department of Social Services 
FGD focus group discussion 
GPA  grade point average 
ICT information and communication technology
INGO international non-governmental organization
IRCD  ICT and Resource Centre for Persons with Disabilities
KII key informant interview
MTB multimedia talking books
NCTB National Curriculum and Textbooks Board 
NGO non-governmental organization
NPRP National Preparedness and Response Plan
OPD organization of persons with disabilities
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
UDL Universal Design for Learning
UGC University Grant Commission 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
USAID United States Agency for International Development
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization8
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshOverview
Throughout	 2020,	the	COVID-19	 pandemic	 posed	unprecedented	 challenges	 for	national	education	 systems.	
All learners have been impacted by school closures and the disruption to learning; however, vulnerable 
and marginalized learners, such as children and young people with disabilities, have been disproportionately 
affected (UNESCO, 2020; World Bank, 2020). Bangladesh is no exception in this regard. Indeed, the coun-
try’s	National	 Preparedness	 and	Response	 Plan	(NPRP)	for	COVID-19	 takes	a	national,	 pro-poor	 approach,	
but	lacks	specific	mention	 of	ensuring	 inclusive	 and	accessible	 education	 for	children	and	young	people	
with disabilities. Although the NPRP addresses the needs of vulnerable groups in more general terms – along 
with the provision of emergency supplies, education, and emergency services to 5 million people – it offers 
no precise plan for persons with disabilities. 
This study sheds light on Bangladesh’s initiatives in the area of disability-inclusive education. The particu-
lar focus is on the role of its Accessible Reading Materials (ARM) initiative and how this has contributed 
to	ensuring	disability-inclusive	and	accessible	education	during	the	COVID-19	 pandemic	in	Bangladesh.	ARM	
is a government-led initiative that was launched in 2014 by the then Access to Information (a2i) programme 
of	the	Prime	Minister’s	 Office,	now	the	Aspire	to	Innovate	 Programme	 of		the	Information	 and	Communica-
tion Technology (ICT) Division of the Government of Bangladesh. It was launched in recognition of the need 
for solutions to ensure virtual, as well as regular reading access for all students, including children and young 
people with barriers to reading. ARM is aimed at satisfying the educational needs of all students including 
students with print and learning disabilities. 
The main challenge in the area of accessible and inclusive education in Bangladesh is that most publications 
remain locked in printed form or non-Unicode colonial font, and are inaccessible to persons with disabilities – 
including those who need materials in accessible formats. This situation became more pronounced following 
the countrywide lockdown and related closures of educational institutions. As a result of the closures, Bang-
ladesh’s millions of schoolchildren found themselves deprived of learning materials. 
This study’s focus is on the ARM initiative and its effectiveness during the pandemic. It has also considered 
the additional complementary initiatives undertaken by the government during the pandemic to distribute 
materials	 among	beneficiaries	 via	its	online,	offline,	and	media	platforms.	 These	are	included	 below	after	
the section on the recommendations and conclusion of this study.9
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshKey implementers
a2i – Access to Information
Initiated	in	Bangladesh	 in	2007	by	the	Prime	Minister’s	 Office	(with	support	from	USAID	and	the	United	Na-
tions Development Programme [UNDP]), the objective of the a2i programme is to increase transparency 
and	improve	governmental	 efficiency	 in	public	service	delivery.	The	main	focus	of	a2i	is	to	make	information	
and	services	available	 to	citizens	and	reducing	 inefficiencies	 in	terms	of	accessing	 governmental	 services	
(Rahman, Aminuzzaman and Ahmed, 2019).
Goal of the a2i programme: 
To ensure easy, affordable and reliable access to quality public services for all citizens of Bangladesh. 
a2i seeks to:
• empower civil servants with the tools, expertise, knowledge, and resources they need for experi-
menting with and innovating citizen-centric solutions to public service challenges;
• establish both physical and online one-stop access points that scale innovative services 
and make them available to citizens easily, reliably and in an affordable manner; 
• encourage and support non-government actors, including small entrepreneurs, teachers, 
and youth, to partner with government actors (a2i, 2020). 
Read more: https://a2i.gov.bd/about/   
YPSA – Young Power in Social Action 
Established in 1985 by ‘socially conscious youths’, YPSA is an organisation that aims to ‘stop violence, and build 
a peaceful Bangladesh.’ YPSA takes steps to prevent violence by arranging peacebuilding youth dialogues 
and capacity-building workshops (YPSA, 2020).
Goal of the organization:  YPSA envisions a society without poverty where everyone’s basic needs 
and rights are ensured. YPSA exists to participate with the poor and vulnerable population with all 
commitment to bring about their own and society’s sustainable development (YPSA, 2020).
Read more: http://ypsa.org/about-us/  10
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshPartnerships
The copyright for the accessible reading materials 
developed for persons with print disabilities belongs 
to the Bangladesh Government’s a2i programme 
and YPSA. 
‘a2i has been mandated to continue to bring about in-
novation to solve daily challenges faced by students 
with disabilities, while YPSA promises to continue to be 
involved in activities that will ease the way of quality 
and effective education for students with disabilities 
in Bangladesh. The DSS [Department of Social Services] 
within the Ministry of Social Welfare has been involved 
from the very onset of this project since the department 
is mandated to serve the interests of persons with disa-
bilities. They facilitate the procurement and distribution 
of the materials among users within the scope of differ -
ent government projects.’
~ Md. Arifur Rahman, Chief Executive, YPSA
The National Curriculum and Textbook Board (NCTB) 
has emerged as the key technical partner to this in-
itiative: it has taken responsibility for updating con-
tent and distributing the materials to school-aged 
children. 
‘DAISY Consortium admires the commitment 
of the Bangladesh Government to provide its print dis -
abled population with adequate learning materials. 
Therefore, we are happy to be involved in the ARM initi-
ative which could be considered as a model.’
~ Dipendra Manocha, DAISY Consortium.
In the international arena, the initiative has received 
technical and advisory support from the DAISY 
Consortium and the Accessible Books Consorti-
um of the World Intellectual Property Organization 
(WIPO). In addition to this, UNDP offers a2i addition-
al	financial	 support,	 complementing	 funding	from	
the Bangladesh Government.DAISY
DAISY (Digital Accessible Information 
System) is a technical standard for dig-
ital audiobooks, periodicals, and com-
puterized text. DAISY is designed to be 
a complete audio substitute for print ma-
terial	and	is	specifically	 designed	 for	use	
by people with print disabilities, such as 
blind learners, those with impaired vi-
sion, and those with dyslexia. 
Based on the MP3 and XML formats, 
the DAISY format has advanced features 
such as the ability for users to search, 
place bookmarks, precisely navigate line 
by line, and regulate speaking speed 
without distortion. DAISY also provides 
aurally accessible tables, references, 
and additional information. As a result, 
DAISY allows visually impaired listeners 
to navigate something as complex as 
an encyclopedia or textbook. 
DAISY multimedia can come in the form 
of a book, a magazine, a newspaper, 
a journal, computerized text, or a syn-
chronized presentation of text and audio. 
It provides up to six embedded ‘naviga-
tion levels’ for content, including embed-
ded objects such as images, graphics, 
and MathML. In the DAISY standard, 
navigation is enabled within a sequen-
tial and hierarchical structure consist-
ing of (marked-up) text synchronized 
with audio.11
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshImpact of COVID-19 on disability-inclusive 
education in Bangladesh
The	COVID-19	 crisis	has	had	an	enormous	 im-
pact on learners’ access to quality and inclu-
sive education in Bangladesh, as it has all over 
the world. Children and young people with dis-
abilities, however, have been disproportion-
ately affected: the challenges of the pandemic 
have been compounded by the barriers these 
learners already face, such as lack of infor-
mation and resources to effectively engage 
in academic endeavor, typical discrimina-
tion and stigma, lack of knowledge among 
the teachers to satisfy their curricular needs, 
and lack of access to learning materials or 
teaching (World Bank, 2020). 
In an attempt to bridge the ever-widening 
gap between those with and without access 
to quality education, the Bangladesh gov-
ernment has implemented several initiatives 
to ensure accessible, equitable and quality ed-
ucation for students with disabilities. This has 
included the conversion of all Grade 1–12 text-
books through its ARM initiative, the provision 
of accessible dictionaries, and the training of teachers in areas such as universal design for learning (UDL). In 
order to evaluate and understand these initiatives, it is necessary to examine how relevant, appropriate, and ef-
fective they have been; in particular, the role of the ARM initiative and its commitment of ensuring accessible 
and disability-inclusive education during the pandemic.
From 17 March 2020, all educational institutions in Bangladesh were closed, and remained so during the pan-
demic.	The	direct	loss	of	learning	opportunities	 caused	by	this	was	the	most	immediate	 impact	of	COVID-19	 on	
the education sector, and was particularly felt by learners with disabilities. An assessment conducted by Build-
ing Resources across Communities (BRAC) revealed that 29 per cent of students with disabilities expressed 
fear of being excluded from educational opportunities due to the sudden change in the education delivery 
mechanism during the pandemic. This experience was disproportionately higher among female students 
(17 per cent of females and 15 per cent of males reported this) (Salam, 2020). 
Disability, however, is not the only factor that has affected access to education. Families and communities liv -
ing	in	poorly	connected,	 rural	communities	 faced	further	difficulties	 in	ensuring	 access	to	education	 for	chil-
dren and young people: it is at the intersection of poverty, remoteness, and disability where some of the most 
marginalized learners are found. Factors such as limited access to education technology, little or no internet/
electricity connectivity, and inaccessible remote teaching materials play major roles in the exclusion of learn-
ers at this intersection. Even where learners have access to online education, children and young people 
with disabilities face greater challenges in comparison with other learners. They are at risk of being left 
behind due of the absence of appropriate assistive equipment, low-speed internet connections, accessible 
reading materials, and support (UN, 2020; World Bank, 2020). 
Many	initiatives	 that	are	targeted	 towards	children	with	disabilities	 have	faced	difficulties	 during	the	pan-
demic due to a lack of prior experience with accessible learning materials, assistive technologies, or remote 
learning. It is therefore necessary to examine and evaluate the contribution that the ARM initiative has made 
in regard to expanding opportunities for students with disabilities and the enhancing of quality inclusive 
education.
A visually 
impaired 
student 
is using screen 
reading 
software 
and a keyboard 
to read 
and navigate 
accessible 
books. 12
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshLiterature review
In order to establish the current capacity of remote learning and digital learning in Bangladesh, and the ef-
fectiveness and impact of the ARM initiative in particular, a thorough review of the literature was conduct-
ed. This included policy documentation, reports, and academic literature. This review is presented below 
and structured under the following themes: overall prevalence of disability; prevalence of disability among 
children and young people; national laws and policies on disability; disability inclusion in education poli-
cies; disability inclusion in ICT policies; and background and current status of the ARM initiative. In struc-
turing the literature review in this way, the policy climate, the current state of ICT initiatives, and the status 
of the ARM initiative in particular are explored.  
Overall prevalence of disability
According to the Disability Information System, 1,810,821 people in Bangladesh have a disability (1,108,859 men, 
699,473	women,	and	2,489	who	are	described	 as	third	gender)	(Bangladesh,	 2020).	However,	 the	preva-
lence of disability in Bangladesh is unclear: the 2011 census reported disability prevalence to be 1.4 per cent 
(1.3	per	cent	female,	1.5	per	cent	male)	(Disability	 Alliance	on	SDGs,	2019);	however,	 the	Household	 Income	
and Expenditure Survey, conducted the previous year – a more in-depth study following the Washington 
Group questions, also conducted by the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) – found the disability preva-
lence rate to be above 9 per cent (BBS, 2014). Existing data on disability or persons with disabilities are not 
adequate, reliable, or comprehensive. Reported data on disability rights are based on sample surveys or 
micro-level initiatives generally undertaken by non-government organizations (NGOs) in their working areas. 
The BBS and the Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies have yet to conduct any comprehensive map-
ping of persons with disabilities in Bangladesh (Thompson, 2020). 
Prevalence of disability among children and young people 
There is a lack of information regarding the prevalence of disability among children and youth in Bangladesh. 
According to the 2011 national census, between the age group of 0-19, approximately 3 million suffer from at 
least one kind of disability (Bangladesh, 2011). Children with disabilities in Bangladesh are among the most 
marginalized in terms of access to education. Even prior to the pandemic, while the primary school enrolment 
rate in Bangladesh was 97 per cent, only 11 per cent of children with disabilities received any form of educa-
tion (UNICEF, 2014). Primary schools are entrusted with the responsibility of identifying children with disabili-
ties	within	respective	 catchment	 areas,	but	there	is	no	effective	system	in	place	for	such	identification,	 nor	are	
identification	 questionnaire	 templates	 followed	 up	regularly.	 Schools	have	little	or	no	significant	 initiatives	
for identifying children with disabilities (Thompson, 2020).
National laws and policies on disability
Bangladesh	 was	among	the	first	countries	 to	ratify	and	bring	into	force	the	two	most	significant	 United	Na-
tions accords that protect the rights of children with disabilities: the Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(CRC), in 1990, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), in 2007. The country has 
also taken several legislative and policy actions towards nationalizing these global commitments, including 
the Children Policy, adopted in 2011; a new Children Act, passed in June 2013; and the Rights and Protection 
of	Persons	with	Disabilities	 Act	2013,	which	was	passed	in	October	2013.	Ratification	 of	the	CRPD	enhanced	
a comprehensive government structure for accountability and coordination. This is reinforced by a vibrant 
civil society, which plays a key role in promoting human rights and equity through the provision of basic social 
services for children with disabilities. The government has also established a National Foundation for the De-
velopment	 of	the	Disabled	 Persons	to	provide	financial	support	to	programmes	 implemented	 by	non-govern-
mental	and	social	organizations.	 As	part	of	affirmative	 action,	the	government	 has	also	introduced	 a	10	per	
cent ‘quota system’ for the employment of people with disabilities in the services of the republic. A National 
Action Plan for issues relating to disability has also been developed (Thompson, 2020). 13
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshDisability inclusion in education policies
The Education Policy 2010 addresses children with disabilities, as does the Comprehensive Early Childhood 
Care and Development Policy 2013. Children with disabilities are addressed in these policies and there 
is an emphasis on inclusion, beginning with early learning centres/preschools and other early childhood 
development centres. Fewer initiatives, however, are in place for secondary school students with disabilities. 
The National Skills Development Policy 2012, developed with technical support from the International Labour 
Organization, includes the mainstreaming of disability in all governmental training programmes. The aim 
is to ensure reasonable accommodation and to develop disability-inclusive training modules and curricula.
Additionally, a National Strategy for Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Skills Development was drafted 
in 2013 that aims to assist in strengthening disability inclusion in the sector (Thompson, 2020). While the Min-
istry of Education and the Ministry of Primary and Mass Education in Bangladesh are both working to meet 
the goal of providing free primary and secondary education to all children by 2030, children with disabilities 
fall under the purview of the Ministry of Social Welfare, meaning that the educational needs of students 
with disabilities are effectively siloed away from those in charge of education (UNICEF, 2014). In response 
to concerns raised by the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the government of Bang-
ladesh	has	offered	affirmation	 that	the	Disability	 Act	of	2013	guarantees	 the	right	to	access	to	education	
for every person with a disability, including the right to participate in either general or special education, 
and prohibits discrimination based on disability status. 
Disability inclusion in ICT policies
The Bangladesh Government’s ICT policy has prioritized the issue of inclusion and accessibility for persons 
with disabilities in the service delivery mechanisms. Article 3 and strategic content 3.1.2, 3.1.3, and 3.1.8 em-
phasize the accessibility of services and assistive devices, while article 4 focuses on implementing ICT-based 
education at all levels and emphasizes access to education, materials, and mechanisms for students with spe-
cial educational needs (BBS, 2018).
Background and current status of the ARM initiative 
The Bangladesh Government, along with non-governmental/private organizations, provides a range 
of school services and inclusive education programmes for blind and partially sighted students. Although 
some of the organizations use audiobooks as supplementary educational materials, there are no accessible 
reading materials for many students with visual impairments. 
YPSA	(along	with	a2i,	the	Prime	Minister’s	 Office	by	the	technical	 support	of	WIPO,	Accessible	 Books	Consorti-
um, and the DAISY Consortium) have produced DAISY digital multimedia books, accessible e-books, and dig-
ital Braille books for learners from Grades 1 to 10. These offer a higher level of accessibility and are more 
cost-effective than the normal paper books that are used by students with visual disabilities, print disabilities, 
and learning disabilities. As part of the project, all textbooks were converted into DAISY multimedia format, 
which can be converted further into DAISY full text and full audio textbooks, Braille, and accessible e-books 
from	the	DAISY	source	files.	The	digital	textbooks	 are	accessible	 for	all,	including	 students	 with	visual	disabil-
ities, print disabilities, and learning disabilities. 
After the successful completion of 33 primary school textbooks, YPSA produced all 72 secondary school text-
books,	with	the	support	of	a2i.	In	an	initiative	formally	launched	 by	the	Honourable	 Prime	Minister	of	Bangla-
desh, all students with a visual impairment in Bangladesh receive DAISY multimedia books each year. It is ex-
pected that this will increase levels of terminal competencies in users by the end of the year. A randomized 
controlled trial is being conducted by the Institute of Education Research of Dhaka University to measure 
the effectiveness of this initiative. 14
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshThanks to this initiative, all learners can now receive equitable and quality primary and secondary education 
leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes (Sustainable Development Goal [SDG] Target 4.1). Fur-
thermore, education facilities have become child, disability, and gender sensitive, and provide safe, inclusive 
and effective learning environments for all (SDG Target 4.a). The DAISY multimedia books have opened new 
avenues for students who previously faced marginalization, and allow for greater access to educational re-
sources	for	all	(Bhattacharjee,	Hossain,	and	Shiblee,	2019).	
Students 
receive 
an Android-
based 
accessible 
reading device 
distributed 
by YPSA  
with the  
support  
of the ABC  
of WIPO.
Orientation 
session 
for students 
on the use 
of accessible 
reading 
materials.15
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshObjectives and methodology
Objectives
This study focuses on the Bangladesh Government’s ARM initiative and its effectiveness during the pandemic. 
The	two	specific	objectives	are:
1.  To assess the role of the ARM initiative in regard to ensuring inclusive and accessible education for learn-
ers	with	disabilities	during	the	COVID-19	pandemic	in	Bangladesh.
2.  To examine the relevance and use of ICTs in different segments of the initiative, particularly during 
COVID-19	in	terms	of	access	to	learning	opportunities.	
Methodology
To assess the role of the ARM initiative, its 
current status, effectiveness, and impact 
(with a particular focus on ICTs) were ana-
lysed	in	the	context	of	the	COVID-19	 pan-
demic. A desk-based review of the litera-
ture, focus group discussion (FGD), and key 
informant interview (KII) methods were 
used to collect qualitative data. Data were 
collected from both primary and second-
ary sources: primary data were collected 
through 13 KIIs and 4 FDGs, and second-
ary data were collected through desk 
reviews of relevant documents of state 
and	non-state	 offices,	research	 organiza-
tions, relevant national and international 
policies and commitments, and websites 
of relevant ministries of the Bangladesh 
Government. 
DVD cover 
page 
of mulimedia 
taking book, 
Grades 6-10.
A screen 
of a DAISY 
standard 
multimedia 
talking book.16
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshFindings
The	findings	of	this	study	are	presented	 under	the	following	 themes:	relevance	 and	appropriateness;	 ef-
fectiveness;	 efficiency;	 impact;	and	sustainability.	 This	section	will	present	findings	under	these	thematic	
headings.
Box 1. outlines the research questions that relate to each theme; these are included to provide the reader 
with context and more information on how the study was carried out. 
Box 1.1 Research themes and questions
Relevance and appropriateness 
• How	closely	aligned	is	the	Bangladesh	Government’s	national	policy/institutional	strategy	
and its interventions and plans with national and global goals supporting disability-inclusive 
COVID-19	responses?
• How	aligned	is	the	ARM	initiative	with	its	commitment	of	ensuring	disability-inclusive	education	
during	the	pandemic?
• How	appropriate	is	the	national	and	institutional	current	approach	for	inclusion	of	disabled	stu-
dents	in	formal	or	non-formal	education?
Effectiveness
• What role did the ARM initiative play during the pandemic in ensuring accessible education 
for	children	and	young	people	with	disabilities?
• To what extent has the initiative facilitated the teaching-learning process through the use 
of	ICTs?
• What	ICTs	and	advanced	(artificial	intelligence–enhanced)	ICTs/assistive	devices	are	being	used	
during	the	ARM	initiative,	and	what	are	the	specific	objectives	in	mind?
Efficiency
• How	efficiently	have	the	resources	dedicated	to	the	ARM	initiative	been	used	to	deliver	
high-quality	outputs	in	a	timely	fashion,	and	to	achieve	targeted	objectives?
• How	efficient	was	the	initiative	during	the	COVID-19	pandemic?
Impact – how successful has the ARM initiative been to date, and are there signs of impact of: 
• Expanding	opportunities	for	students	with	disabilities?
• Increasing equitable access to quality inclusive education for children and young people 
with	disabilities	during	the	pandemic?
Sustainability 
• What	are	the	key	features	of	the	ARM	initiative	that	ensure	sustainability?	17
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshRelevance and appropriateness
ICTs	have	the	potential	 to	make	significant	 improve-
ments to the lives of persons with disabilities by allow-
ing them to enhance their educational, social, cultural, 
political, and economic integration within communities 
(UNESCO, 2021; Watkins, Tokareva, and Turner, 2012). 
Recognising this, the Bangladesh Government has 
made ICTs an integral part of any disability-inclusive de-
velopment agenda. In doing so, the government took 
into	consideration	 the	findings	 of	different	 national	
and international data that revealed a high prevalence 
of disability, and subsequent illiteracy rate, in Bangla-
desh (Tareque, Begum, and Saito, 2014). It introduced 
the ARM initiative in 2014 in order to ensure acces-
sible, equitable, and quality education for students 
with disabilities.
The main parties involved in the implementation 
of this initiative were a2i and YPSA. During the KII, rep-
resentatives	 from	both	organisations	 affirmed	 their	
dedication and emphasized their approach regarding 
the involvement of persons with disabilities and organ-
izations of persons with disabilities (OPD) throughout 
the initiative: the programme manager of this initiative 
was also a person with visual impairment, who is also 
the focal person for DAISY in Bangladesh. 
During the preparation phase of the initiative, plan-
ning meetings were held with groups of OPDs – along 
with students with disabilities – in order to include their 
opinions and suggestions. Persons with disabilities were 
involved in a participatory process to identify problems. 
The OPD members (along with teachers with disabilities 
and teachers at the Government School for the Blind) 
interacted with the target group and collected feed-
back upon which the project was designed. Abdus Sam-
ad, former head teacher at the Government School 
for the Blind, Chittagong, and member of the expert 
committee of the ARM initiative mentions in this context 
that  ‘Persons with disabilities were not only involved 
in the planning phase, but also in every phase of the im-
plementation stage, such as the production and dissem-
ination of accessible reading materials, the promotion 
of training on the use of accessible reading materials 
by the students and teachers, the use of digital Braille 
by the Braille press and implementation, and the moni-
toring and evaluation of the project’. 
In summary, this initiative was designed by persons 
with disabilities for persons with disabilities; this offers 
a level of validity and relevance to the ARM initiative.‘There was a need to create a solution 
that will be accessible for all, and satisfy 
the educational needs of all schoolgoing 
children in Bangladesh including 
students with visual and print disabilities 
all year round. So the government 
undertook the ARM initiative 
years ago which used open source 
technologies and the power of ICTs 
in line with the government’s vision 
of creating a Digital Bangladesh. 
All the textbooks of class 1-12 were 
converted into different accessible 
formats such as multimedia full text, 
full audio, human-narrated talking 
books, accessible e-books, and digital 
Braille. After the closure of educational 
institutions in March 2021, everything 
was shifted online, and then 
the byproduct of the ARM initiative 
became a blessing for the government 
in ensuring inclusive and accessible 
education for students with disabilities 
during the COVID-19 pandemic’.
Dr. A K M Reazul Hassan,  
Member (Primary Curriculum), 
NCTB, Ministry of Education18
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshEffectiveness 
The ARM initiative appeared to be appreciated by students with disabilities during the FGD and KII. The par-
ticipants expressed that, since their introduction, these books have made learning more accessible during 
lessons, and have continued to do so during school closures. They also agreed that with the help of these ac-
cessible books, they are now able to access textbooks at the beginning of their academic calendar – even dur-
ing the pandemic. The ARM initiative has reduced their dependency on others as they can operate the books 
and study on their own; it also became clear that these books are encouraging many of their friends to study 
technical subjects, e.g., the sciences and mathematics. 
Prior to the initiative, learners struggled to access textbooks (and other educational content) due to the ab-
sence	of	accessible	 study	materials.	 These	difficulties	 required	support	from	their	family	members	 or	friends.	
Md.	Hassan,	a	government	 primary	school	teacher	(who	is	also	a	person	with	visual	disability),	 noted	that	
‘prior	to	the	pandemic,	 sometimes	 it	was	difficult	to	get	accessible	 study	materials,	 but	after	the	pandemic,	
everything shifted towards online, accessibility got top priority, and these materials became easily available 
via different online platforms.’ Another FGD participant, Ms Lima Akter, a student with visual disability, stated: 
‘When school closed, I returned to home without carrying a single printed Braille book because the books are 
too	large	to	carry	and	I	did	not	think	that	schools	will	remain	closed	for	this	long.	Hence,	I	resorted	to	multi-
media digital talking books and have been using these since through my Android phone.’
The government and its partners have distributed thousands of assistive devices such as Android smart-
phones, laptops, and book readers. With these, students with disabilities have been able to progress in terms 
of their academic studies, especially during school closures. The government and its partners (such as YPSA) 
have	been	distributing	 these	books	via	the	internet	to	students	 with	disabilities.	 Indeed,	one	of	the	findings	
from the discussions with student and teacher groups was that these books are relatively easy to obtain; 
many participants mentioned that they were able to download these books from websites such as www.ypsa.
org, www.abcglobalbooks.org or www.accessiblebookbd.org.
Some participants, however, expressed concern regarding the third-party distribution mechanism of accessi-
ble materials and argued that the government should create a national online accessible books library. Sajjad 
Hossain	Saju,	President,	 Disabled	 Students’	 Society	of	Chittagong	 University	 (DISSCU),	 stated	the	following:	
‘Government needs to create an online accessible books platform of its own or an accessible Android applica-
tion from where we can get all the books whenever we need and wherever we need. Also, tertiary-level books 
are not fully accessible for students with disabilities.’
Although issues were raised about the accessibility of these books, it appears that, in the opinion of the focus 
groups and interview participants at least, the ARM initiative has been effective both in reaching marginalized 
learners and offering an accessible alternative to basic textbooks. 
Efficiency
The Bangladesh Government has prioritized the issue of digital inclusion of persons with disabilities 
within its Digital Bangladesh initiative, and has undertaken several ICT-based initiatives, such as ensuring in-
clusive and equitable quality education for all. The ministry representatives, including the NCTB, emphasized 
that the production of DAISY digital multimedia talking books, accessible e-books, and digital Braille books 
have	been	popular	among	the	beneficiary	 groups	and	are	highly	cost-effective	 compared	 with	more	inacces-
sible paper books. 
Prior to the ARM initiative, students with disabilities (especially visually impaired students) struggled to access 
Braille	books	for	their	studies.	These	books	were	too	heavy	to	carry	and	supply	was	insufficient	 compared	
to the demand. Furthermore, there was no set time in the academic year when Braille books would be-
come available to learners. ‘During the beginning of each year, we were sceptical whether we will get Braille 
or not. Since the accessible reading materials became available in multiple formats, this problem became 
our past. Even during this pandemic, as a teacher, I can assure all my students that they will get their books 19
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Bangladeshon	the	first	day	of	the	academic	 year,	without	any	delay’,	noted	Sheuli	Akhter,	teacher	of	the	Government	
School	for	the	Blind	in	Chittagong.	 The	ARM	initiative	 has	also	proven	to	be	efficient	throughout	 the	shift	
to	online	learning	during	the	COVID-19	 pandemic:	 due	to	their	digital	nature,	these	books	are	easy	to	distrib-
ute online, making delivery easier and safer, at least to those with access to the internet.
Students are 
reading Braille 
books in class.
Impact 
In Bangladesh, a large number of visually im-
paired students are now studying at many 
levels within various educational institutions. 
According to the DSS, three-quarters passed 
the	Higher	Secondary	 Exam	across	the	country	
in the last year (with 3.54 per cent achieving 
GPA-5, the highest score achievable). Thanks 
to the ARM initiative, visual impairment did not 
stop these students from competing with their 
peers and succeeding in their studies. 
This success indicates that, due to the ARM in-
itiative, students with disabilities are succeed-
ing academically and will, in the future, be able 
to contribute to the national economy. The 
partnership with NCTB and the DSS in the Min-
istry of Social Welfare has enriched the ARM in-
itiative and has taken Bangladesh a step closer 
to providing inclusive and equitable quality ed-
ucation for all. Currently, under this initiative, 
multimedia talking books (MTB) are also being 
developed for the university curriculum. 
Previously,	 it	was	difficult	to	provide	Braille	
books at the beginning of the year, but since 
forming a partnership, the NCTB and a2i have 
ensured that the revised multimedia talking 
books and Braille books – along with other ‘Thanks to the ARM initiative, among the visually 
impaired candidates, 73.93 per cent passed 
and 3.54 per cent achieved GPA-5 in last 
year’s Higher Secondary Exam.’ 
Md. Zulfikar Haider, Director, Operation, 
DSS, Ministry of Social Welfare, Government 
of Bangladesh.
‘Leaving no one behind is the centrepiece 
of UNDP’s approach and strategies 
to tackle inequality and build resilience 
to sustain development results. To put it in action 
in the education sector of Bangladesh, UNDP 
collaborated with the government through 
the a2i programme and undertook some brilliant 
initiatives such as ARM, accessible book reader, 
accessible dictionary, etc. Those innovative 
initiatives have been proven instrumental 
in realising the Bangladesh government’s deep 
commitment of achieving the SDGs, especially 
the SDG 4.’
 Ashekur Rahman, Assistant Resident 
Representative, UNDP, Bangladesh20
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Bangladeshtextbooks – are available on 1 January every year 
for visually impaired and print-disabled students. 
NCTB also stated that it distributed these books 
among approximately 150,000 students with disabil-
ities	on	the	first	day	of	the	academic	 year.	Further-
more, the a2i programme stated that its multimodel 
virtual	educational	 approach	 during	COVID-19	 has	in-
corporated the use of ARM in all its relevant segments 
to ensure disability inclusion and accessibility. It is es-
timated that approximately 70,000-100,000 students 
(around 10 per cent of the total viewers) with disa-
bilities	have	benefited	 from	the	government’s	 online	
education	 initiative	 during	COVID-19	 –	a	figure	that	
is expected to grow in the near future. Among these 
students, 50 per cent were girls with disabilities.
In addition, with the support of WIPO and its Acces-
sible Book Consortium (ABC), YPSA has distributed 
around 2,000 Android smartphones among the most 
marginalized students with disabilities (50 per cent 
of whom were girls). ‘In collaboration with YPSA, 
WIPO’s Accessible Books Consortium has distribut-
ed hundreds of android devices, which have proved 
their	effectiveness	 during	COVID	19,	as	students	 are	
using these devices to access different online plat-
forms and read digitally accessible books. Likewise, 
during the pandemic we have noticed an increase 
in the number of accessible recourses downloaded 
from the ABC Global Book Service, from users locat-
ed in Bangladesh’, said Santiago Streeter of WIPO/
ABC.
An accessible book reader, innovated by a2i, enhanc-
es the accessibility of content for students with dis-
abilities. a2i has distributed around 1,200 devices 
(in	collaboration	 with	the	National	 Human	Rights	
Commission, DSS, and UNDP) among students with dis-
abilities; these have proven to be effective in enhanc-
ing inclusive and accessible education, particularly 
during	the	COVID-19	 pandemic.	 These	devices	are	
helping recipients to access educational and infor-
mational content, along with other online/e-services 
provided by governmental and private-sector organ-
izations.	During	the	COVID-19	 pandemic,	 YPSA’s	in-
ternational exchange of books from the ABC Global 
Book Service and Bookshare Library has increased 
tenfold with the organizations recording more 
than 5,000 book shares among the end users.‘YPSA has developed more 
than 200,000 pages of DAISY standard 
accessible reading materials for students 
with disabilities in the last few years 
which have proved to be the most 
effective regarding education during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Since 
the pandemic, we have distributed these 
books to more than 10,000 (4,600+ 
were girls with disabilities) students 
with disabilities via email, WhatsApp, etc.’ 
Rashedujjaman Chowdhury, Associate 
Program	Officer,	ICT	and	Resource	
Centre for Persons with Disabilities 
(IRCD), YPSA
‘Our multimodal education delivery 
mechanism during COVID-19 incorporated 
the use of ARM in all its relevant 
segments to ensure disability inclusion 
and accessibility, and approximately 
70,000-100,000 students (around 10 per 
cent of the total viewers) with disabilities 
have benefited so far, among whom 
at least 50 per cent were girls 
with disabilities.’
Md. Afzal Hossain Sarwar, Policy 
Specialist	and	Head	of	Future	
of Education, a2i, ICT Division, 
Government of Bangladesh21
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshBox 1.2 Case study of Md. Shakil Khan, a student with visual impairment
I am Md. Shakil Khan. My father, Md. Ayub Khan, is a middle-class businessman and my mother, 
Farzana Begum, is a housewife. I have one brother and one sister, and two of us are visually impaired. 
At the beginning of our student life, my sister and I had to face many adversities, but now I am studying 
in the first year of honors in the Department of Political Science , University of Chittagong. My younger 
sister, who is also visually impaired, is studying in the 10th class of Rahmania High School.
Being visually impaired, it is almost impossible for us to read regular printed books. To make 
the impossible possible, YPSA, with the help of a2i, published MTBs. Most of the visually impaired 
students like me have been relieved of the grief of not being able to read books. Now we are able 
to continue our studies successfully. Overall, visually impaired students are doing well. The real 
example of which is me. I passed the 2019 Higher Secondary Examination with GPA-5 and got admitted 
to the University of Chittagong. 
I would like to point out more specifically that during the current Coronavirus pandemic, when all 
educational institutions were declared closed and when regular study became inaccessible and impossible 
for visually impaired students like me, accessible reading materials became the relief for my academic 
continuity. The television-centric education programmes have been a savior for my younger sister. Also, 
in 2018 I received a smartphone from YPSA which has been providing me with opportunities, especially 
during the pandemic, that were previously inaccessible to me.  
Sustainability
The content developed under the ARM initiative is entirely digital 
and easily accessible through low-cost assistive devices. These 
books, therefore, will last and be relevant into the foreseeable 
future – and will continue to be when updated versions of text-
books are made available. Furthermore, as a result of the Bang-
ladesh Government’s adoption of the UN CRPD, and the in-
troduction of its own law titled Persons with Disability Rights 
and Protection Act 2013 (which included a separate section on 
ICT and accessibility, national ICT policy, and the Right to Infor-
mation Act), issues of accessibility in the education sector are 
gaining	priority:	the	government	 has	affirmed	that	it	will	support	
the production of accessible books (Article 19, 2015). 
‘Since Bangladesh is transforming into a digital Bangladesh, 
it was a mandate of the government to ensure equal access 
for all in the service and education sector; hence, through 
the	ARM	initiative,	 the	government	 has	reaffirmed	 that	it	will	
support the production of accessible books for making education inclusive and barrier-free for all including 
students with disabilities’, said Faruque Ahmed, Consultant (Academic Research, Development and ICT), Pri-
mary Education Development Programme 4, Government of Bangladesh.
As a result, after amending the act and including Braille production issues in its mandate, the NCTB now pub -
lishes accessible books on a yearly basis. The ownership fostered by NCTB will ensure that whenever there 
is	any	modification	 to	the	national	curriculum,	 it	will	be	integrated	 into	the	accessible	 reading	materials,	 en-
suring that updated content is available to students with or without disabilities. Furthermore, due to the use 
of open source technology, the process of developing and producing the full-text and full-audio multimedia 
books,	Braille	books,	and	accessible	 e-books	through	the	use	of	DAISY	is	easily	replicable	 (Bhattacharjee,	 Hos-
sain,	and	Shiblee,	2019).	However,	 in	order	to	attain	maximum	 leverage	 from	this	innovation,	 it	is	necessary	‘The ratification 
of the Marrakesh Treaty, 
and the amendment 
of the existing copyright law, 
still remained as a huge barrier 
for accessible book production’.
Monsur Ahmed 
Chowdhury, Founder/
President, Bangladesh 
Visually	Impaired	Peoples	
Society	(BVPIS),	and	former	
Member of the Monitoring 
Committee, CRPD22
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Bangladeshto continuously implement innovations that complement the overall learning environment for students 
with disabilities. The future of this initiative lies in making it independent of hardware type, and user-friendly 
for students of any level of education. 
One	factor	that	has	the	potential	 to	enhance	 the	sustainability	 of	this	initiative	 is	the	ratification	 of	the	Mar-
rakesh	Treaty	(WIPO,	2016).	This	would	allow	for	copyright	 exceptions	 to	facilitate	 the	creation	of	accessible	
versions of books and other copyrighted works for print-disabled students.
Other factors 
In addition to the key themes, other factors relating to the ARM 
initiative were raised during this study. These include the move 
from	CDs/DVDs	 to	accessible	 book	readers,	 the	coverage	
of key subjects, accessibility for students in higher education, 
and the awards won. 
Any students with access to computers, tablets, or Android mo-
biles can use the materials created under the ARM initiative. 
Visually	impaired	 students	 can	participate	 in	learning	by	listen-
ing to content that has been designed to make learning easy 
and engaging. These books were initially developed in the form 
of	CDs/DVDs	 which	required	 a	laptop	or	computer	 to	run.	To	
address this dependency on computers, a portable DAISY-sup-
ported accessible book reader was also developed for playing 
these books. It has been designed in a way that will provide com-
plete subtitles, along with audio subtitles for printed materials, 
and	is	specifically	 designed	 to	be	used	by	students	 with	print	
disabilities, including blindness, impaired vision, and dyslexia. 
The ARM initiative has already encompassed all textbooks 
for Grades 1–12, and works alongside all other existing 
DAISY-supported/ePub books. It also uses several other open 
source technologies. Therefore, it is able to cover key subjects 
such as science, English, literature, Bangla, history, geography, 
social science, and religion of the NCTB. 
This project has developed more than 100 university books 
and is working to increase this number. In order to establish an accessible inclusive education, especially 
during	emergencies	 such	as	the	COVID-19	 pandemic,	 DAISY-standard	 accessible	 reading	materials,	 created	
under the Bangladesh Government’s ARM initiative, have played a vital role. 
This initiative, and its pioneers, have received several international awards thanks to its innovation and ef-
fectiveness. These have included the UNESCO Prize for Digital Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
in 2018, the World Summit on the Information Society Prize in 2017, the Accessible Books Consortium Award 
for Accessible Publishing Initiative at the International Excellence Award in 2015, and the Information Society 
Innovation	Fund	(ISIF	Asia)	award	in	2014	(Bhattacharjee,	Hossain	and	Shiblee,	2019).‘Before the ARM initiative, 
it was difficult to create 
an accessible lecture as there 
was no Unicode text except 
colonial fonts. Now that 
the ARM has used several 
open source technologies, 
it became much easier for me 
to engage with my students 
who have disabilities. It is easier 
for the teachers now to prepare 
lectures in accessible formats 
which has especially proven 
its effectiveness during 
the pandemic when everything 
moved to online’.
Mohammad Kabir Hossain, 
Associate Professor, 
Government Teachers’ 
Training College, Comilla.23
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshBarriers encountered with the ARM 
initiative
During the KIIs and FGDs, the participants pointed out several barriers that they encountered regarding 
the implementation of the ARM initiative and using the books created under the ARM initiative. They are 
being presented in the following two segments. Participants also shared obstacles that they faced regarding 
the	COVID-19	pandemic.	
Common barriers:
1 Lack of high-quality text-to-speech software in the Bangla language.
2 Lack of Unicode text. 
3Absence of copyright exception in the copyright law for the production of accessible reading materi-
als in the country. 
4Lack of established library service or effective online mechanism for distribution of accessible reading 
materials.
5 Lack of awareness on accessible digital contents.
6 Lack of motivation among the teachers to use DAISY books.
7 Scarcity of low-cost playback devices for accessible reading materials.
Barriers specific to COVID-19:
1Lack	of	collaborative	response	to	mitigate	the	inclusive	educational	challenges	posed	by	COVID-19.	
2The stigma attached to using assistive technologies and online mechanisms in the education sector 
in Bangladesh.
3 Confusion about the changes in education delivery and assessment approaches driven by the pandemic.24
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshRecommendations
• Conduct	a	dedicated	in-depth	national	survey	to	find	out	the	exact	prevalence	of	children	and	youth	
with disabilities and their needs.
• Make all accessible reading materials available through a national online accessible books platform, as 
well as through an accessible Android application.
• To provide access for students with all types of disabilities; all government e-learning platforms should be 
made inclusive and accessible.
• Ratify the Marrakesh Treaty urgently; the treaty will allow for copyright exceptions to facilitate the crea-
tion of accessible versions of books and other copyrighted works for print-disabled students.
• Include sign language in the government’s multimodal approach and promote the use of sign language 
in all levels of education. 
• Set	up	specific	plans	for	the	return	to	school,	with	clear	measures	for	children	with	disabilities.	Ensure	
that information and instructions regarding the return to school (and social distancing measures) are 
provided in multiple, accessible formats.
• Changes	in	the	education	delivery	system	due	to	the	COVID-19	crisis	should	be	institutionalized	in	policy.
• Initiate inclusive policy reforms to improve the quality of education for children with disabilities in con -
sultation with representative organizations of children and youth with disabilities and their parents. 
Ensure that policy reform addresses key enablers of inclusive education, such as appropriate investment 
in teachers; inaccessibility of learning materials, methods and environment; and reasonable accommoda-
tion provision.
• Ensure that all learning materials prepared for the return to school are accessible, and that consultation 
with children with disabilities and their families is made mandatory on any curricular or assessment 
changes. 
• Provide additional training and support to teachers and aides who teach and support children 
with disabilities. 
• Scale up the current innovations such as MTBs, accessible e-books and accessible book readers.25
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshConclusion
In Bangladesh, education pathways and curriculum delivery have traditionally been generic and linear, 
with	little	flexibility	 to	respond	to	individual	 student	needs.	With	the	aim	to	build	a	nation	and	a	workforce	
ready to contribute to the 21st century, the Government of Bangladesh introduced ICTs into many aspects 
of education; the ARM initiative is one introduction, among others (see below), that has opened new avenues 
for students with disabilities to harness resources and continue learning, even when schools closed at the be-
ginning of 2020.
When	the	COVID-19	 pandemic	 hit	Bangladesh,	 the	government	 was	forced	to	identify	new,	innovative,	 in-
clusive, and accessible ways to provide students with learning opportunities. The ARM initiative has proven 
to be effective in this regard by ensuring inclusive and accessible education for students with disabilities, 
and has contributed to a narrowing of the ‘digital divide’. It is necessary, however, to maintain levels of sup-
port and to ensure that students have more, and better, opportunities to learn in the post-pandemic era. To 
this end, policy reform must be pursued to ensure that remote learning options are maintained – that these 
options are not only implemented in times of emergency, but are in place to provide continuous support 
and remedial learning options for both classroom-based and home-based learners, with and without disabil-
ities. If this support is provided in a sustainable and impactful manner, then – and only then – will the ARM 
initiative reach its full potential. If delivered, and maintained, effectively, this ‘model of good practice’ will not 
only	benefit	the	millions	of	learners	with	and	without	disabilities	 within	Bangladesh,	 but	will	act	as	an	exam-
ple that the Global South can follow. The impactful and effective ARM initiative, co-designed with persons 
with	disabilities,	 will	provide	a	strong	model	for	others	to	work	from	and,	in	turn,	may	benefit	countless	
learners around the world. 26
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshOther initiatives that complement ARM 
The ARM initiative is one of many ICT-based programmes that have allowed learning to continue during peri-
ods	of	school	closures.	 Below,	five	others	are	listed.	These	are	not	‘competing’	 initiatives;	 each	complements	
all of the others. This multilateral approach allows more learners to be reached by a greater number of initi -
atives, depending on their location, their access to technology and the internet, and their particular learning 
needs.
Education through TV broadcast (Sangsad+EduSkills)
Since national school closures, the state-run Sangsad Bangladesh Television has been broadcasting pre-re-
corded lessons for primary, secondary, madrasah, and technical students under the supervision of respective 
directorates (and with technical help from a2i). As of December 2020, a total of 501 classes for primary stu-
dents,	1,260	classes	 for	secondary	 students,	 260	classes	 for	madrasah	 students,	 and	140	classes	 for	technical	
students were telecast. These classes have been viewed by around 3.5 million students daily. The classes were 
based on the annual lesson plan and students were given regular homework, as they would receive from 
school-based	 classed.	The	first	class	was	aired	on	29	March	 2020	for	secondary	 students.	 Later	classes	for	pri-
mary,  technical, and madrasah students started from 7 April, 19 April, and 5 May, respectively (a2i, 2020).
Purpose
• academic classes for students
• live sessions for students, parents, and teachers (proposed).
So far…
2,100 + 
Classes broadcast13 .6 million
Students reached3,500  classes
Target to broadcast by December 2020
A class using 
Facebook  
Live during  
the COVID-19  
pandemic. 
First TV broadcast 
on 29 March 202027
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshEducation through social media (Facebook Live and YouTube)
During the pandemic, social media have been an important platform for internet-based educational content 
delivery	(Sobaih,	Hasanein,	 and	Abu	Elnasr,	2020).	Alongside	 television	 broadcasts,	 many	Facebook	 pages	
and YouTube channels aired online classes for pre-primary to Grade 12 students. 
A Facebook page named Ghore Boshe Shikhi, owned by the Directorate of Primary Education (DPE) and run 
by a2i, aired more than 2,200  classes and had 10 million views in total. An a2i specialized platform for adoles-
cents, Konnect Kishore Batayon, aired 378 classes for college students which had around 1.7 million views dai-
ly.	According	 to	a2i’s	Teachers’	 Portal	online	class	dashboard,	 as	of	March	2021,	roughly	268,000	classes	 were	
taken by more than 14,000 teachers from over 5,400 Facebook pages. Online classes were also broadcast 
from the Konnect YouTube channel, which has around 87,000 subscribers. In addition to academic classes, 
the Konnect Facebook page also aired numerous classes on ‘soft skills’, such as painting, web development, 
film-making,	 and	game	design.	The	Konnect	online	counselling	 session	on	mental	health	and	well-being,	
which was available through the same platform, was also widely viewed (a2i, 2020).
Purpose 
• online classes for students
• additional support for students, parents, and teachers.
So far… 
90 ,000 + 
Classes1.0 million
Students per day
1.5 million students
Target to reach per day by December 2020
Implementing agencies
Ministry	of	Education,	 Ministry	of	Primary	and	Mass	Education,	 Directorate	 of	Secondary	 and	Higher	Educa -
tion, Directorate of Primary Education, Directorate of Technical Education, Directorate of Madrasha Educa -
tion, National Academy of Primary Education, National Curriculum and Textbook Board, Bangladesh Technical 
Education	 Board,	Bangladesh	 Madrasah	 Education	 Board,	a2i	Programme,	 ICT	Division	(through	 a2i	official	
facebook page, Konnect – Kishore Batayon Facebook Page and Youtube Channel, Teachers’ Portal Facebook 
Page, Skills Portal Facebook Page and Youtube Channel, Imam Portal Facebook Page and Youtube Channel) 
with	financial	support	from	UNICEF.‘After the countrywide 
lockdown, all the educational 
institutions were closed 
and everything shifted online. 
Then the reading materials 
created under the ARM 
initiative became handy 
to continue the online education 
delivery for ensuring inclusive 
and accessible education 
for students with disabilities’.
Selina Islam, Deputy Direc-
tor (Monitoring), Directorate 
of	Secondary	and	Higher	
Secondary Education, Ministry 
of Education28
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshCommunity radio–based classes
The state-run radio station Bangladesh Betar has been broadcasting classes for primary students, along-
side	Sangsad	 Bangladesh	 Television,	 as	educational	 institutions	 remained	 closed	due	to	the	COVID-19	 pan-
demic.	Classes	have	been	aired	through	Bangladesh	 Betar	and	16	community	 radio	stations	simultaneously,	
from Sunday to Thursday from 4:05 p.m. to 4:45 p.m. Students can join these classes through radios or mo-
bile phones. In addition, the a2i programme has conducted over 200 interactive radio classes with the help 
of teachers from the Directorate of Technical Education, along with support from UNICEF, and have been able 
to reach millions of students (Bangladesh National Portal, 2020).
Purpose
• academic content for different classes
• live sessions with teachers
• public service announcements for educational awareness.
So far…
450 + 
classes for primary  
and 200+ classes 
for technical500 ,000
Students  
per day600 ,000 + students
Target to reach per day  
by December 2020
Implementing agencies
Primary agencies: Ministry of Primary and Mass Education, Directorate of Primary Education, National Acad-
emy	of	Primary	Education	 and	National	Curriculum	 and	Textbook	 Board	with	the	financial	support	of	UNICEF	
and Bangladesh Betar as broadcasting partner.
Technical agencies: Implemented by Ministry of Education, Directorate of Technical Education, and Bang-
ladesh	Technical	 Education	 Board	with	financial	 support	of	UNICEF	and	Bangladesh	 Betar	as	broadcasting	
partner.29
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshMuktoPaath e-learning platform
MuktoPaath has created opportunities for general, vocational, and lifelong education for many learners, in-
cluding those with disabilities. Disadvantaged and marginalized groups are able to receive vocational educa-
tion	on	MuktoPaath	 that	relates	to	and	is	beneficial	 in	terms	of	self-employment.	 Teachers,	 students,	 youths,	
working people, outbound workers, migrant workers, or housewives, for example, are able to learn with Muk-
toPaath. Currently, MuktoPaath has 1.1 million registered learners and offers more than 187 courses. During 
the	pandemic,	 MuktoPaath	 played	a	significant	 role	as	a	first-hand	 responder	 in	the	health	and	education	 sec-
tor.	MuktoPaath	 provides	 10	COVID-focused	 e-learning	 courses	for	doctors,	health	professionals,	 and	teach-
ers in collaboration with governmental and non-governmental organizations, such as the Directorate Gen-
eral	of	Health	Services,	 Bangabandhu	 Sheikh	Mujib	Medical	University,	 DPE,	the	Directorate	 of	Secondary	
and	Higher	Education,	 BRAC,	and	John	Hopkins	University	 and	trained	around	50,000	doctors,	 100,000	health	
professionals, and 300,000 teachers (a2i, 2020).
Purpose  
• providing e-learning facilities for learners.
So far…
180 + 
Сourses1 million
Learners100
Partners
A screen shot 
of the  
MuktoPaath  
e-learning 
platform.
Implementing agencies
a2i	Programme,	 ICT	Division,	 Cabinet	Division	and	UNDP	Bangladesh	 with	100+	government	 and	non-gov-
ernment partners. 30
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshEmporia web platform and mobile application
The Emporia application is composed of a web platform and a mobile application. The web platform pro-
vides	access	to	an	e-learning	 platform	 and	job	portal	specifically	 designed	 for	persons	with	disabilities.	 Users	
of the mobile application need to download the mobile application on an Android mobile device.
Emporia includes ICT courses and a ‘dynamic exam’ system. The job portal allows persons with disabilities 
easier access to jobs and a simpler way to apply for positions.  
The app features:
• dynamic responses, depending on type of disability
• the	ability	for	users	to	complete	their	e-learning	course	both	in	online	or	offline	mode
• the opportunity for learners to map their progress, retake exams, or comment/rate particular courses
• the	ability	for	users	to	build	a	CV	and	to	search	and	apply	for	jobs	(Emporia,	2021).
Purpose 
· e-learning and job portal for persons with disabilities. https://emporia.bcc.gov.bd/
Implementing agencies 
Digital Bangladesh, ICT Division, genweb2, Bangladesh Computer Council. 
Screenshots 
from 
the Emporia 
application. 
A screen shot 
of the Emporia 
web platform 
(desktop).31
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshEmpowerment of Persons with Disabilities including NDD 
[Neurodevelopmental Disabilities] through ICT
This project aims to help persons with disabilities develop ICT skills that will promote their employment 
and	allow	them	to	contribute	to	a	Digital	Bangladesh.	The	specific	goals	are:
• to produce specialized audio and video tutorials on ICT training with voice and sign language help
• to develop a specialized, interactive, accessible national e-learning platform (web portal) for persons 
with disabilities
• to establish a specialized ICT Resource Centre for persons with disabilities 
• to popularize ICTs among persons with disabilities (Emporia, 2021).
Purpose 
• to help persons with disabilities develop ICT skills and become skilled employees (EPWDICT, 2020).
Implementing agency
Bangladesh Computer Council 
Synchronous learning management system (LMS) 
for tertiary education and training      
On 23 June 2020, under the leadership of the Ministry of Education, the University Grant Commission (UGC) 
and a2i, the ICT Division developed a virtual platform allowing for the organization of different types of live 
classes and training sessions. For video conferencing, a range of software is being used (WebEx, Google meet, 
and other video conferencing software along with Muktoclass conferencing software). Different types of mul-
timedia and audio-visual content in different formats (pdf, PowerPoint etc.) can be shared as attachments.
Purpose
• to provide greater access to learning opportunities during the pandemic and beyond 
(https://www.virtualclass.gov.bd/ )
So far…
47 
Institutes reached 
(34 universities/colleges 
and 13 training institute) 5900 +
Learners 
reached570 +
Learners 
reached2850 +
Virtual classes 
organized
(a2i, 2020).
Implementing agencies
Ministry of Education, University Grant Commission (UGC), a2i, ICT Division.32
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshReferences
• a2i (Access to Information). 2020. ‘a2i: about’. Last accessed 13 April 2021: https://a2i.gov.bd/.
• Article 19. 2015. ‘Country report: The right to information in Bangladesh’. Last accessed 15 March 2021: 
www.article19.org/resources/country-report-the-right-to-information-in-bangladesh/. 
• Bangladesh National Portal. 2020. ‘Ongoing projects’. Last accessed 15 April 2020: https://ictd.gov.bd/
site/page/847fccce-adfa-4bf0-b0b2-cb18d6208000/On-going-Projects.
• BBS. 2011. Bureau of Statistics. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics: National Census 2011.  
 Last accessed 13 April 2021: http://bbs.dhaka.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/bbs.dhaka.gov.bd/law_pol-
icy/6ed6b42c_2015_11e7_8f57_286ed488c766/Socio-Economic%20and%20demogr aphic%20Report%20
2012.pdf.  
• BBS.	2014.	Bureau	of	Statistics.	Household	Income	and	Expenditure	Survey.	Dhaka:	Bangladesh	Bureau	
of Statistics.
• BBS. 2018. ICT Division. Information and Communication Technology Policy 2018. 
• Bhattacharjee,	V.;	Hossain,	S.;	Shiblee,	S.	2019.	‘Production	of	DAISY	standard	accessible	reading	mate-
rials for the students with print disability of grade 1-10 of Bangladesh’. Alexandria, Egypt: Bibliotheca 
Alexandrina.
• Disability Alliance on SDGs. 2019. Sustainable Development Goals and Disability. Disability Alliance 
on SDGs, Bangladesh. Last accessed on 12 March 2021: https://bdplatform4sdgs.net/wp-content/up -
loads/2019/11/Sustainable-Development-Goals-and-Disability-A-Baseline-of-Bangladesh.pdf.
• Emporia. 2021. ‘Emporia – Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities’, Google Play.  
Last accessed 15 April 2021: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=bd.gov.
epwdict&hl=en_US&gl=US . 
• EPWDICT (Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities including NDD through ICT). 2020. ‘About Empow-
erment of Persons with Disabilities including NDD through ICT’.  
Last accessed 15 April 2021: https://epwdict.com/. 
• MoSW. 2020. Disability Information System. ‘Disability Information System’.  
Last accessed 10 March 2021: www.dis.gov.bd/.  
• Rahman, N.; Aminuzzaman, S.; Ahmed, N. 2019. ‘End-line evaluation of Access to In -
formation (a2i) – II Project’. UNDP, Bangladesh. 
 Last accessed 12 April 2021: https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/documents/download/15024 
• Salam,	A.	2020.	‘Disability	inclusive	education	and	COVID	19	response:	Bangladesh	perspective’.	Last	ac -
cessed 12 April 2021: https://bangkok.unesco.org/sites/default/files/assets/article/Inclusion%20and%20
Gender%20Equality%20in%20Education/webinar%20ppt/Bangladesh.pdf . 
• Sobaih,	A.E.E.;	Hasanein,	A.M.;	Abu	Elnasr,	A.E.	2020.	‘Responses	to	COVID-19	in	higher	education:	Social	
media usage for sustaining formal academic communication in developing  countries’. In Sustainability, 
12(16),	6520.
• Tareque, M.I.; Begum, S.; Saito, Y. 2014. ‘Inequality in disability in Bangladesh’. In PLoS One 9(7).
• Thompson,	S.	2020.	‘Bangladesh	Situational	Analysis:	Version	II	–	June	2020’.	Last	accessed	13	April	2021:	
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/bitstream/handle/20.500.12413/15525/DID%20SITAN%20Bangla-
desh%20Version%20II%20June%202020.pdf?sequence=1 . 
• UN	(United	Nations).	2020.	‘Leaving	no	one	behind:	the	COVID-19	crisis	through	the	disability	and	gender	
lens’.	UN/DESA	Policy	Brief	#69.	Rome:	UN/Department	of	Economic	and	Social	Affairs.33
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Bangladesh•UNESC O. 	 2020. 	 ‘Including 	 learners 	 with 	 disabilities 	 in 	 COVID-19 	 education 	 responses’. 	 Last 	 accessed
14
 
April 2021: https://en.unesco.org/news/including-learners-disabilities-covid-19-education-responses.
•UNESC
O. 2021. ‘ICTs for persons living with disabilities’. Last accessed 15
 
April 2021:
https://en.unesco.org/partnerships .
•UNICEF
. 2014. Situation Analysis on Children with Disabilities in Bangladesh 2014. UNICEF: Bangladesh.
•W
atkins, A.; Tokareva, N.; Turner, M. 2012. ‘ICTs in education for people with disabili-
ties’.
 
UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education. Last accessed on 15
 April 2021:
https://iite.unesco.or
g/pics/publications/en/files/3214644.pdf.
•WIPO
	(W
orld
	Intellectual
	Pr
operty
	Or
ganization).
	2016.
	Marr
akesh
	T
reaty
	to
	Facilitate
	Access
	to
	Published
W
orks
	
for
	
Persons
	
Who
	
Are
	
Blind,
	
Visually
	
Impaired
	
or
	
Otherwise
	
Print
	
Disabled.
	
Last
	
accessed
	
10
	
April
2020: www
.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/marrakesh/.
•W
orld
	
Bank.
	
2020.
	
Leveraging
	
Lessons
	
from
	
the
	
COVID-19
	
Crisis
	
for
	
Learners
	
with
	
Disabilities:
	
Global
Seminar. W
ashington: World Bank.
•YPSA (Y
oung Power in Social Action). 2020. ‘About us’. Last accessed 14
 April 2021:
ht
tp://ypsa.org/about-us/.34
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshGlossary
1. Accessible reading materials are print- and technology-based readings and core materials that are 
designed or converted in a way that makes them usable across the widest range of user needs.
2. Information and communication technology (ICT) is a broader term for information technology, 
and refers to all communication technologies, including the internet, wireless networks, cell phones, 
computers, software, middleware, videoconferencing, social networking, and other media applications 
and services.
3. Inclusive education  means all children in the same classrooms, in the same schools. It means 
real learning opportunities for groups who have traditionally been excluded – not only children 
with disabilities but also, for example, speakers of minority languages.
4. The Marrakesh Treaty was adopted on 27 June 2013, in Marrakesh and it forms part of the body 
of international copyright treaties administered by WIPO. It has a clear humanitarian and social 
development dimension and its main goal is to create a set of mandatory limitations and exceptions 
for	the	benefit	of	the	blind,	visually	impaired,	and	otherwise	print	disabled.
5. Remote learning occurs when the learner and instructor, or source of information, are separated 
by time and distance and therefore cannot meet in a traditional classroom setting. 
6.	Universal design for learning (UDL) is an approach that acknowledges that in a classroom of learners, 
all are different. They understand, process, and express things differently from one to the next. UDL 
asserts that teaching and learning should utilize a multitude of methods to support all learners, 
including, but not limited to, learners with disabilities. UDL involves three key principles of teaching so 
that it provides multiple means of: 1) engagement, by helping students stay motivated to learn through 
a variety of methods; 2) representation, by having content presented in a variety of ways; and 3) action 
and expression, by having students show what they have learned in a variety of ways. By employing 
various means of these three principles, learning achievement for all students is improved.
7. Unicode is a universal character encoding standard that assigns a code to every character and symbol 
in every language in the world. Since no other encoding standard supports all languages, Unicode 
is the only encoding standard that ensures that you can retrieve or combine data using any 
combination of languages.35
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshAppendices
Appendix 1. Documents reviewed
1. Bangladesh	Preparedness	and	Response	Plan	for	COVID-19.
2. United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
3. The Persons with Disabilities Rights and Protection Act 2013.
4. National Education Policy 2010 of Bangladesh Government.
5. National ICT Policy 2018 of Bangladesh Government. 
6.	Eight Five-Year Plan, General Economics Division, Bangladesh Planning Commission, Government 
of Bangladesh.
7. Prospects	and	Challenges	of	Distance	Learning	During	COVID	19	Pandemic,	Campaign	for	Popular	
Education (CAMPE), Bangladesh 2020.
8. Online Educational Activities, a2i, ICT Division, Government of Bangladesh. 
9. ‘Ensuring	an	inclusive	return	to	school	for	children	with	disabilities’,	UNICEF	East	Asia	and	Pacific	Region	
COVID-19	Technical	Guidance.
10. International Telecommunication Union Guidelines, ‘On how to ensure that digital information, services 
and	products	are	accessible	by	all	people,	including	persons	with	disabilities	during	COVID-19’.
11. Bangladesh Situational Analysis by the Institute of Development Studies. 
12. ‘Pivoting	to	inclusion:	Leveraging	lessons	from	the	COVID-19	crisis	for	learners	with	disabilities’,	issues	
paper by World Bank Group. 
13. Situation analysis on children with disabilities in Bangladesh by UNICEF Bangladesh. 
Appendix 2. Organizations consulted for the research
Direct involvement of organizations of persons with disabilities: 
1. BVPIS	(Bangladesh	Visually	Impaired	People’s	Society)	
2. DISSCU (Disabled Students’ Society of Chittagong University)
3. Disabled Development and Research Center–DDRC
4. Disabled Welfare Association
5. IRCD (ICT and Resource Centre for Persons with Disabilities)
NGOs working for persons with disabilities whose representatives were involved: 
1. CSID (Centre for Services and Information on Disability)
2. CDD (Centre for Disability in Development)36
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshAppendix 3. Participants – Key informant interviews 
and focus group discussions
Table 1: List of KII participants
Participants Number 
of KIIs
Key official 
of relevant ministries Position: Member (Primary Curriculum)
Organization: NCTB, Ministry of Education. 
Deputy Director (Monitoring)
Directorate	of	Secondary	and	Higher	Education
Ministry of Education 2
Position: Director, Operation.
Organization: DSS, Ministry of Social Welfare1
Position:	Policy	Specialist	and	Head	of	Future	of	Education
Organization: a2i, ICT Division.1
Representative 
of development 
partner 
(international)Position: Director at Developing Countries Program
Organization: DAISY Consortium1
Position: Assistant Resident Representative
Organization: UNDP, Bangladesh 1
Position: Capacity Building Consultant
Organization: ABC of WIPO1
Representative of development partner (national)
Position: Chief Executive
Organization: YPSA 1
Researcher
Position: Consultant, Academic Research, Development and ICT
Organization: Primary Education Development Programme 41
Representative of disabled people’s organization)
Position: Founder President 
Organization:	BVPIS,	and	Former	Member	of	the	Monitoring	Committee,	CRPD1
Representative of teachers 
Position: Associate Professor, Bangladesh Civil Service (General Education)
Organization: Government Teachers’ Training College, Comilla1
Representative of parents
Address:	Hamzerbag,	Muadpur,	Chittagong
Other details: Mother of a visually impaired student (Shakil) who got a GPA-5 in the last 
secondary	school	certification	examination	1
Representative of students
Class:	Honours	final	year
Institution: University of Chittagong
Position: President 
Organization: DISSCU 1
1337
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshTable 2: List of FGD participants
Relevant stakeholders Number 
of FGDs
OPDs, NGOs and international NGOs 1
Country Operational 
Coordinator,
Humanity	and	InclusionCoordinator, 
BVPISExecutive Director, 
Disabled Development 
and Research Center- DDRC
Executive Director, 
Centre for Services 
and Information Disability.Founder and Executive 
Director, Disabled WelfareThematic expert,
Inclusive Education, Centre 
for Disability in Development
Coordinator, Manusher 
Jonno FoundationAssociate	Programme	Officer,	
IRCD of YPSA
Teachers 1
Mohsena Model Government Primary 
School, Patiya, ChittagongSurikora, Gonoboti, Government Primary 
School, Choddogram, Comilla
Nasirabad	Government	Girls’	High	School,	
ChittagongGovernment School for the Blind, 
Chittagong.
Government	Visually	Impaired	School,	PHT	
Centre, Mirpur, Dhaka North Rangcharpra Government Primary 
School,	Valuka,	Mymensingh
Barishal Primary School, Shilong, Barishal Temuria Government Primary School, 
Murad Nagar, Comilla
Manob Kollan Trust School, Pabna
Parents and Caregivers 1
Address: Sunnia Madrasa, Muradpur 
ChittagongAddress: Shantirhat Patiya, Chittagong
Address: Oxygen Shitol Jharna, Chittagong Address: Mohammadpur 124, Chittagong
Address: Madam Bibirhat, Sitakund, 
ChittagongAddress: Chandonaish, Chittagong
Address: Ujirpara, Patiya, Chittagong Address: Dhaka
Students 1
Class: 12 
Institution: Government City CollegeClass: 10
Institution: Rohmania School
Class: 2nd year
Institution: Dhaka UniversityClass: 12
Institution: Government City College
Class: 12
Institution:	Hajeratun	Degree	CollegeClass: 12
Institution:	Hajeratun	Degree	College
Class: 1st year
Institution: Chittagong UniversityClass: 9
Institution: Rahmaniya Girls School
0438
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of BangladeshAbout the authors 
Vashkar	Bhattacharjee, 	a 	person 	with 	a 	visual 	disability , 	is 	curr ently 	serving 	as 	the 	National 	Consultant 	for 	Ac -
cessibility
	in
	the
	a2i
	Pr
ogram
	of
	the
	ICT
	Division
	of
	the
	Bangladesh
	Go
vernment.
	He
	is
	also
	serving
	as
	the
	disa
-
bility
	focal
	point
	and
	is
	looking
	after
	the
	disability
	portfolio
	of
	YPSA.
	His
	curr
ent
	focus
	is
	on
	bringing
	inno
vation	
in inclusive education, including the cr
eation of accessible reading materials, facilitating the government’s in-
clusive
	university
	initiative
	and
	e-learning
	for
	persons
	with
	disabilities.
	He
	is
	also
	the
	focal
	person
	in
	Bangladesh 	
for 
DAISY, ABC, Bookshare and Federation of DPO’s Sitakund, and is working as the country representative 
of
	G3ict.
	V
ashkar
	is
	the
	first
	Bangladeshi
	to
	r
eceive
	the
	UNESC
O
	Emir
	Jaber
	Prize
	for
	Digital
	Empo
werment
	of
	Per
-
sons
	with
	Disabilities
	(2018/2019).
	He
	has
	also
	r
eceived
	the
	Henry
	Viscar
di
	Achie
vement
	Awar
d
	in
	2017
	and
	Bang
-
ladesh’s
	
honorable
	
Prime
	
Minister’s
	
award
	
as
	
a
	
successful
	
person
	
with
	
a
	
disability
	
in
	
2016.
Shahriar
	Mohammad
	Shiblee
	is
	curr
ently
	serving
	as
	the
	r
esearch
	and
	documentation
	officer
	at
	YPSA.
	Since
	
the 
beginning of his career, he has been working on issues and challenges around disability and, especially, 
on
	the
	issues
	of
	accessible
	and
	inclusive
	education
	and
	r
elevant
	tr
aining
	facilities.
	He
	has
	ten
	years
	of
	e
x-
perience in the art and cultural sector. Shahriar is the recipient of the ICCR scholarship (2014) and the West 
Bengal Showvik award of honour (2015).
 
IITE/2021/PI/1