COVID 19, 
technology-based 
education 
and disability:  
The Case of Mauritius
Emerging practices in inclusive 
digital learning for students 
with disabilities Typesetting: IP Guslisty 
The views and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent those of UNESCO. The designations employed and the presentation of material do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area, or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries.
This publication was produced by UNESCO, in the context of the Global Programme Supporting Disability Inclusive Covid-19 Response and Recovery at National Level supported by the United Nations Partnership on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNPRPD) Multi Partner Trust Fund.
International Institutefor Educational Planning
© UNESCO 20213
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusContents
Acknowledgements 4
List of figur
es
 5
List of tables
 5
Abbr
eviations and acronyms
 6
The education system in Mauritius: An o
verview
 7
Major educational reform: Nine Year Continuous Basic Education  7
NY
CBE and special education needs
 7
Brief overview of SEN education in  Mauritius   8
Laws and policies on disability  8
Definition of a disabled person
 8
Definition of special educational needs
 8
Norms and standar
ds in the SEN schools
 10
Special needs education in Mauritius
 10
Special Education Needs Authority 
 11
Classification and prevalence of disabilities   12
Classification of disabilities and children with disabilities 12
Pr
evalence of disability in SEN schools in Mauritius
  13
Over
all data in SEN education 
 14
Objectives and methodology  19
Objectives 19
Methodology 19
Findings
20
Technological innovations in SEN education: Relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact, 
and sustainability
  22
Barriers in the conte
xt of
 
Mauritius
 25
C
OVID-19 and learners with disabilities: Post-COVID-19 recovery for policy and practice
  26
Recommendations for the r
ole of technology for learners with disabilities in a post-COVID 
environment/recovery plan
 
in
 
Mauritius
  27
National ICT policy for SEN education  28
Adapted SEN curriculum
 28
T
eaching and learning continuum
 29
T
echnological infrastructure
 29
Empo
wering key stakeholders
 30
School–home partnership 
 31
Quality assur
ance
 31
Unified implementation str
ategy
 31
W
orking with partners
 31
Conclusion   32
Refer
ences 33
Appendix 35
About the author
 374
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusAcknowledgements
This case study would not be possible without the contributions of key informants from the Ministry of Educa -
tion, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology; non-governmental organizations; Disabled Peoples’ Inter-
national; disabled people’s organizations; the Mauritius Institute of Education; the United Nations Develop-
ment Programme; Inclusion Mauritius Government Integrated Unit in J. T. Ramsoondur Government School; 
and the Special Education Needs Resource and Development Centre. While working from home in Mauritius, 
I have valued the readiness of informants to share their insights remotely under very difficult COVID-19 re-
lated circumstances.
Heartfelt appreciation to the UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education and the Interna-
tional Institute for Educational Planning teams for giving me the opportunity to engage in promising and hu-
manistic research and for the constant support and constructive feedback. 5
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusFigure 1: Three-pronged approach 9
Figure 2: Enrolment in SEN schools by type of impairment and gender, 2020 13
Figure 3: Enrolment in SEN schools by gender, 2020 13
Figure 4: Expenditure on education as a percentage of total government expenditure (2018–2021) 14
Figure 5: Government expenditure on education by sector, 2018/2019 – 2020/2021 14
Figure 6: Enrolment of male and female students in SEN schools, 2015–2020 15
Figure 7: Age group distribution of SEN learners, 2015–2020 15
Figure 8: Number of teaching staff from 2015–2019 15
Figure 9: Distribution of SEN schools by district and type of administration, 2020 16
Figure 10: Enrolment in SEN schools by gender and district, 2020 16
Figure 11: Personnel in SEN schools by gender, 2020 17
Figure 12: Personnel in SEN schools, 2018–2020 17
Figure 13: Recommendations for ODL solutions in SEN education 27
Table 1: Classification of disabilities into eight categories 12
Table 2:  Classification of children with disabilities according to learning needs 12List of figures
List of tables6
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusAbbreviations and acronyms
CWD  children with disabilities  
DPI  Disabled Peoples’ International  
DPO  disabled peoples’ organization  
ICT information and communication technology
GIUs Government Integrated Unit  
MIE  Mauritius Institute of Education  
MoETEST  Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology  
NGOs  non-governmental organizations  
NYCBE  Nine Year Continuous Basic Education  
ODL  open and distance learning  
OERs  open educational resources  
RCEA  Roman Catholic Education Authority       
SeDEC  Service Diocésain de L’Éducation Catholique  
SENA  Special Education Needs Authority 
SENRDC  Special Education Needs Research and Development Centre  
SEN  special education needs
SDG    Sustainable Development Goal 
UNCRC United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
UNCRDP  United Nations Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities  7
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusThe education system in Mauritius: 
An overview
The Government of Mauritius strongly supports the right to education and confirms this with its firm commit-
ments to promote education. Children in the Republic of Mauritius have had the privilege to enjoy free edu-
cation through secondary level since 1976, through post-secondary level since 1988, and, as of the academic 
year of 2019, free higher education in public tertiary education institutions.1 The education system in Mauri-
tius is largely based on the British system, as Mauritius was a former British colony. Education in Mauritius 
is compulsory from ages 5 to 16. This law aligns with the fundamental principles of the right to education 
for all children, ensuring that the students have a certain level of literacy, numeracy, and life skills to lead 
a decent life. The present education system allows a pupil to study for two years at the pre-primary level. 
This sub-sector builds the foundations upon which all future learning depends. 
Major educational reform: Nine Year Continuous Basic Education
Mauritius witnessed a major and comprehensive change with the Nine Year Continuous Basic Education 
(NYCBE) reform that took place in 2017. It established a sound foundation for learning and self-development, 
with a strong emphasis on the holistic development of the child. The NYCBE2 is guided by six major pillars: 
curriculum change, innovative pedagogies, meaningful assessment, continuous professional development, 
conducive learning environment, and system governance and accountability. It is equally important to high-
light that the reform is guided by Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4, which ensures inclusive and equita-
ble quality education for all and promotes lifelong learning. 
NYCBE and special education needs
The NYCBE is grounded in a holistic philosophy that emphasizes both greater equity and equality of learning 
opportunities for all students, enabling them to unleash their true potential, regardless of geographical loca-
tion or socio-economic background.
It is crucial to emphasize that Objective 4 of the NYCBE clearly stipulates that learning opportunities must be 
provided to all students, including those with special education needs (SEN), for them to attain high levels 
of achievement according to their abilities and strengths. 
In the context of the educational reform, all the children identified as having SEN will have the opportunity 
to access education to the extent possible in the most appropriate educational settings, including mainstream 
and SEN schools. This educational system does not force all children to reach the highest level of the NYCBE 
(Grade 9), where appropriate assessment procedures will determine up to what level a child would be able 
to succeed in the school. Altogether, through necessary adaptations, interventions, modifications, and ac-
commodations, this new system is in place to create greater learning opportunities for children with disabili-
ties to unleash their true potential.
The NYCBE also allows early diagnosis of students with learning difficulties; early interventions assist those 
learners through the early support programme, requiring remediation in a timely and effective manner. 
Hence, support teachers/paraprofessional teachers have been recruited and trained to assist the class teach-
er in teaching pupils facing learning difficulties. Bearing equity, inclusion, and access in mind, the extended 
stream also forms part of a similar approach, where, after Grade 6, students who would not have reached 
the required standard will still move on to a regional secondary school. However, these students will enter 
an extended four-year stream with the same curriculum as the mainstream three-year programme. 
1  https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/2019/Communique%20250119.pdf . 
2  https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/nys/Documents/NYCBE%20Booklet.pdf.8
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusBrief overview of SEN education 
in Mauritius 
Laws and policies on disability 
It is acknowledged that there are a number of laws in the Republic of Mauritius that relate specifically 
to the rights of persons with disabilities. Key legislation includes the Trust Fund for Disability Act, 1988; Equal 
Opportunity Act, 2008; Training and Employment Act, amended 2012; National Council for the Rehabilitation 
of the Disabled Act, 1986; and Lois Lagesse Act, 1983. Mauritian law promotes employment opportunities 
and career advancement for persons with disabilities in the labour market through the passing of the Train-
ing and Employment of Disabled Persons Act 1996 3 (‘the Act’).
Definition of a disabled person
A disabled person is defined under the Act as a person certified as such by the Training and Employment 
of Disabled Persons Board, an institution established for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the Act. 
Two conditions must be met so as to be certified as a disabled person:
1.  have a long-term physical disfigurement or physical, mental, or sensory disability, including a visual, 
hearing, or speech functional disability, which gives rise to barriers or prejudices impeding his/her 
participation at an equal level with other members of society in major life activities, undertakings or 
fields of employment that are open to other members of society;
2.  be willing and able to work.
The law states that every employer is under an obligation to employ a number of persons with disabili-
ties, representing 3 per cent of his/her workforce. The employer has a duty to provide suitable employment 
to a person with a disability which is adapted to his/her disability. As per Section 14 of the Act: ‘No disabled 
person shall be employed on work which, having regard to the nature of his disability, is not suitable.’
Definition of special educational needs
As per the Special Needs Strategy document 2017,4 the term ‘special educational needs’ has a legal defini-
tion, referring to children who have learning problems or disabilities that make it harder for them to learn 
than most children of the same age. Many children will have SEN of some kind at some time during their 
education. Gifted learners also have SEN, as they require acceleration of curriculum and curricular practices. 
In its commitment to the philosophy of an inclusive-driven approach, the Ministry of Education, Tertiary Ed-
ucation, Science and Technology (MoETEST) embarked on a series of inclusion-driven affirmative initiatives 
for learners with disabilities. The Republic of Mauritius signed the United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) on 25 September 2007, which requires the education system of Mauri-
tius to be responsive to the education needs of all learners, including those with SEN, and ratified it (with res-
ervation) in January 2010. (The three reservations made to the UNCRPD were: article 9 on Accessibility, Article 
24 on Education, and Article 11 on Situations of risk and humanitarian emergencies.) The first report on 
the implementation of the UNCRPD in line with Article 35 was submitted in 2012. As a signatory/adherent 
to the following international agreements/declarations, the Government of Mauritius is committed to estab-
lishing an inclusive education system in the country:
• UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) (1989),
• Jomtien World Declaration on Education for All (1990),
3  https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/docs/WEBTEXT/45308/65039/E96MUS01.htm  
4  https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/Special%20Education%20Needs/SEN_Strategy_2017_Final.pdf.9
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritius•Salamanca Statement and Fr amework for Action (UNESCO, 1994),
•Dakar Fr
amework for Action (Dakar World Education Conference, UNESCO, 2000),
•UNCRPD (2006).
The 2016 
amended version of the 1968 Constitution of Mauritius makes provisions regarding non-discrim-
ination on the basis of race, place of origin, political preference, colour, creed, or sex (Section 3) without 
explicitly laying down the right to education. Similarly, the constitution restricts the rights to vote and be elected for some persons with disabilities and contains outdated terminology – such as ‘persons of unsound mind’ – in Articles 34 (1) and 43, echoed in the Electoral Law, Local Government Act (1989), Section 29, Rodri-gues Regional Assembly Act (2001) Section 5, Subsection 2. These restrictions call for amendments. However, this fundamental right was supported by other legislative and policy frameworks aligning with the National Human Rights Commission. It is equally significant to point out that the right to education is explicitly stipu-lated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
5 (1948), along with many other international human rights 
instruments. The right to education was further echoed in the 2008 Equal Opportunities Act, which states that education institutions do not have the right to discriminate against any person, denying or limiting access to or participating in education, unless the person requires special services or facilities (Article 17).
In the same spirit, within the education legislative framework, the amended 2014 version of the 1957 Edu-
cation Act became the main legal document regulating the formal education system reiterating/reaffirming the right to access to schools with non-discrimination on the basis of race or religion (Section 35). 
In 2006, the MoETEST developed the Special Needs and Inclusive Education Policy with broad consultations 
at all levels in a multisectoral approach. The policy and strategy document was guided by the principles of in-clusion and equity and sets out a new approach for the development of all children and youth by ensuring equal opportunities with supportive environments, along with services for learners with disabilities designed to gradually integrate them into mainstream education. A greater flexibility in the age of admission to prima-ry school and in the completion of lower primary and upper primary were also possible. This policy document introduced a paradigm shift, adopting a needs-based approach while ensuring equal access to learning op-portunities for learners with SEN, based on a three-pronged approach (Figure 1). 
Figure 1: Three-pronged approach
Approach 1: 
Mainstream 
integration
•Childr en with mild or moderate
intellectual or sensorialimpairments can receiveeducation in regular schools
•
Support of ancillary staff and/or teachers and a consultancyservice is r
equired
•Agr
eement with parents/
guardian
•Proper assessmentr
equirementsApproach 2: 
Integrated classrooms
•Childrenwith mor
e severe
disabilitiesreceive educationin specializedsettingswithin regularpublic schoolsor in specialeducation class/unit or resourceroomApproach 3: 
Special needs education/specialized schools
•Appropriate assessmentis r
equired
•A medical certificate attestingdisability or psychological statusthat pr
oves their learning disability
is required for such measures
•Childr
en who are not able
to attend regular schools areentitled to receive educationin special education schools,according to their needs
5  https://www .un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights.10
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusThe Policy Framework and Strategy Document 2017 on Inclusive Education for Children and Youth with SEN 
in Mauritius: Concept to Reality, which is both responsive and sensitive towards learners with disabili-
ties, correlates with the policy directions of SDG 4 and the National Curriculum for NYCBE through the six 
E’s of the philosophy of inclusion. These are: equity; equal access; equal opportunity; equal dignity; effective 
communication; and embrace culture. The three R’s of inclusion - reach, respect, and relationship - are also 
embedded in the policy document. The goal of this document is to maximize and optimize inclusive practices 
to facilitate and achieve inclusion of all learners with SEN in the Republic of Mauritius by 2030. Hence, the pol-
icy has been designed to fulfil its commitment to ‘ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and pro-
mote lifelong learning opportunity’ by ‘leaving no child behind’. In this context, it is important to emphasize 
that the most current Education and Human Resources Strategy Plan 2008–20206 also reiterates the right 
for learners with disabilities to be included into the regular school system at all education levels.
The Disability Bill – anticipated by the SEN sector – is in the consultation process; on 22 February 2021, the Min-
ister for Social Security announced that it would be introduced at the national assembly as soon as possible7. 
The Disability Bill will be adopted to apply the principles of the UNCRPD in Mauritius. 
Norms and standards in the SEN schools
The norms and standards8 for SEN schools provide a classification of disabilities, standards, and require-
ments for learning provision in SEN schools/education institutions specifically targeted at children with SEN. 
It is important to point out that the age of a child admitted in a SEN school is now between 5 and 20. The rec-
ommended ratios for effective and efficient teaching and learning have been reviewed as follows:
• The recommended teacher/pupil ratio is 1:7.
• The recommended teacher/assistant teacher ratio is 2:1.
• The recommended pupil/carer ratio is 15:1.
• The recommended classroom/caretaker ratio is 8:1. 
Exceptions will be made depending on the level of impairment; in which case the above ratios may be re-
viewed by MoETEST.
Special needs education in Mauritius
The education system in the Republic of Mauritius has been responsive to learners with SEN. A major mile-
stone in the history of special education was the enactment of three acts of parliament which gave birth 
to three special education schools in the 1940s. These schools are still run by non-governmental organiza-
tions (NGOs) but funded by the government. The schools are:
• the School for the Deaf, founded by the Society for the Welfare of the Deaf (1965);
• the School for the Blind, founded by the Society for the Welfare of the Blind, which was later renamed 
Lois Lagesse Trust Fund (1946);
• the School for Educationally Sub-Normal Children, founded by the Mauritius Mental Health Association 
(1958).
In 1970s, it was the parents who organized themselves into an NGOs. This was supported by the first Labour 
Government (post-independence 1968–1982). In the early years, SEN schools were run by NGOs. Parastatal 
bodies and NGOs began to provide specialized care, education, and training to children with disabilities, ad-
olescents, and adults. Later, in 1981, the government took the initiative to celebrate the International Year 
for Disabled Persons to provoke reactions from civil service with a hope of encouraging the public service 
to react.
6  https://uil.unesco.org/document/mauritius-education-and-human-resources-strategy-plan-2020-issued-200 9 
7  https://gis.govmu.org/News/SitePages/La-ministre-Daureeawoo-r%C3%A9affirme-l’introduction-du-Disability-Bill-%C3%A0-l’Assembl%C3%A9e-nationale.aspx.
8  https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/Special%20Education%20Needs/6.%20Norms%20and%20Standards.pdf.  11
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusAlthough affirmative efforts were made by the government and NGOs, education for SEN learners was not 
apparent. However, after the Salamanca Convention (1994), the government’s commitment towards strength-
ening the education of children with disabilities was reinforced. With a view to further improve access to edu-
cation for learners with SEN, the first integrated unit was set up in 1995, which was aligned with the UNCRPD. 
In 2005, a policy of compulsory education until the age of 16 brought into focus educational provision for out-
of-school children and, in particular, those who had dropped out of school and those with SEN. 
Special Education Needs Authority 
The Special Education Needs Authority9 (SENA) has been set up to provide the appropriate regulatory frame-
work for learners with SEN and to facilitate the implementation of government policies on SEN. One of the ma-
jor responsibilities of the authority is to harmonize the promotion of programmes and policies for the educa-
tion and holistic development of persons with SEN, in line with the UNCRC and the UNCRPD. The regulations 
governing the registration for SEN institutions, their teaching and non-teaching staff, and any other resource 
person, have been reviewed and are in the process of being completed. With a view to facilitate an inclusive, 
equitable and effective education system, the Norms and Standards for Special Education Needs Institutions 
have been prepared.  
9  https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/Special%20Education%20Needs/Special%20Education%20Needs%20Authority%20Act.pdf.  12
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusClassification and prevalence 
of disabilities 
Classification of disabilities and children with disabilities 
According to the Policy on Inclusive Education 2017,10 disabilities have been classified into eight categories 
(Table 1). Children with disabilities (CWD) have been classified according to their learning needs. Table 2 pre -
sents this classification; this is in place to ensure inclusion in the learning process.
Table 1: Classification of disabilities into eight categories
Categories of disabilities
1 Physical disability (mobility problems, spinal cord injuries, spina bifida, hemiplegia, cerebral palsy)
2 Social, emotional, and behavioural disturbance (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, 
schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, antisocial personality disorders)
3 Intellectual and neurological impairment (Down’s syndrome, Williams syndrome, dyslexia, 
dysgraphia, dyscalculia, epilepsy)
4 Visual impairment
5 Hearing impairment
6 Multiple disabilities (skeletal deformities, sensory disorders, seizure disorders)
7 Other health-related disabilities (cancer, Lyme disease, lupus, multiple sclerosis)
8 Autistic spectrum disorder (autism, Asperger’s syndrome, pervasive developmental disorders)
Table 2:  Classification of children with disabilities according to learning needs
Category Learning needs
Category I: Mild/Moderate Children with mild/moderate learning needs, including the gifted 
and talented, can study in a general class with some special inputs. 
(45% of CWD belong to this category)
Category II: Moderate Children with mild/moderate disabilities (who require some counselling 
services) can study in general mainstream class. 
(30% of CWD belong to this category)
Category III: Severe Children with moderate/severe disabilities, needing resource assistance 
including corrective aids and periodic help in academic areas, will study 
in SEN schools.
(15% of CWD can be classified in this category)
Category IV: Severe/Profound Children with severe/profound disabilities, who require direct attention 
from special teachers, can be placed in SEN schools (10% of CWD come 
under this category).
Children from the non-formal sector who remained unidentified would be included in the system 
through identification, assessment, and appropriate placement.
10  https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/Special%20Education%20Needs/SEN_Strategy_2017_Final.pdf.13
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusPrevalence of disability in SEN schools in Mauritius 
Figure 2 identifies intellectual impairment as the most common disability among students enrolled in SEN 
schools.
Figure 2: Enrolment in SEN schools by type of impairment and gender, 2020
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800Intellectual impairment
Dyslexia
Autism
Physical disability
Epilepsy
Down’s syndrome
Other
Severe and multiple disabilities
Deafness and hearing impairment
Emotional disturbance
Visual impairment271 483
182 386
48 237
70 121
69 107
76 93
35 101
50 72
48 73
31 78
37 63Boys Girls
Figure 2 illustrates that learning disabilities among students enrolled in SEN schools is highest compared 
with other disabilities. Autism is also reported as a common disability among learners in SEN schools. Added 
to that, it is evident that boys suffer from a higher rate of disability compared with girls enrolled in SEN schools. 
The least common disability is visual impairment. Figure 3 shows that the enrolment rate in SEN schools 
is 67 per cent male students and 33 per cent female. 
Figure 3: Enrolment in SEN 
schools by gender, 2020
Male Female
Source: Statistics Mauritius (2020). 3333++676733%
67%
As per the Education Card report, developed by the MoETEST, there were 72 SEN schools in March 2019, 
the majority of which were run by NGOs in collaboration with the Roman Catholic Education Association 
(RCEA). 14
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusOverall data in SEN education 
10,82%
8,25% 8,12%
Figure 4: Expenditure on education 
as a percentage of total government 
expenditure (2018–2021)
Source: Statistics Mauritius (2020). 2018/2019 2019/2020 2020/2021
Figure 4 illustrates government expenditure on education for 2018/2019, 2019/2020, and 2020/2021. There 
was a drop of 2.57 per cent from 2018/2019 to 2019/2020. Despite the unprecedented COVID-19 crisis that 
has negatively impacted world economies (including Mauritius), there was only a slight decrease of 0.13 per 
cent in the education sector from 2019/2020 to 2020/2021. These data also portray the government’s com-
mitment to invest in education and to enhance development in this sector ( Figure 5).
Figure 5: Government expenditure on education by sector, 2018/2019 – 2020/2021
1,6%23,4%50,0%1,5%1,2%7,1%5,0%
2020/2021
1,5%23,1%48,3%2,8%1,0%7,7%4,6%
2019/2020
1,5%23,1%48,3%2,7%0,9%7,7%5,0%
2018/2019
Other 3 
Tertiary education 
Special education needsTechnical & vocational 
Secondary Primary
PrimaryPre-Primary
Source: Statistics Mauritius (2020). 
There was a constant increase in government spending in the field of SEN, from 0.9 per cent to 1.0 per cent 
and, finally, to 1.2 per cent for 2020/2021. It is equally important to highlight that this was possible even 
though expenditures in the education sector saw a slight decrease due to the negative financial impact 
of the pandemic. 15
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusEnrolment in SEN schools
Figure 6: Enrolment 
of male and female 
students in SEN schools, 
2015–2020
Male Female
2015 2016 2017 2018 20191 477
824
1 606
909
1 681
913
1 745
911
1 832
958
As statistics noted in Figure 6 show, enrolment for boys is consistently higher than that of girls in SEN schools. 
These data corroborate the data on disability type, where the number of boys suffering from those disabilities 
exceeds that of girls. Figure 7 and Figure 8 present related data.
Figure 7: Age group 
distribution of SEN 
learners, 2015–2020
3-5 age group 
6-10 age group 
11-15 age group 
16-20 age group 
21 & over 
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019100
693
857
437
214
98
813
950
499
155
73
853
1 068
507
93
74
862
1 090
477
542
86
938
1 130
542
94
The data reveal that the age group of 11–15 was the largest age group of learners with SEN for five consec-
utive years (2015–2019). Similarly, learners with SEN who are 21 years and over was high in 2018, compared 
with other years.
Figure 8: Number 
of teaching staff from 
2015–2019
No. of teaching Staff
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019387 404 411 444 468
There was a gradual increase in the number of teaching staff from 387 (in 2015) to 468 (in 2019). This repre-
sents an approximate rise of 3.8 per cent in the recruitment of teaching staff in SEN schools since 2015. 16
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritius20
7
5
3
6
1
5
2
4
3
5
2
2
3
3
-
2
1Plaines Wilhems
Flacq
Port Louis
Rivière du Rempart
Grand Port
Rivière du Rempart
Pamplemousses
Black River
MokaNGO /RCEA integrated Government integrated unitFigure 9: Distribution of SEN schools by district and type of administration, 2020
Source: Statistics Mauritius (2020).
As Figure 9 shows, it is apparent that more SEN schools are run by NGOs/RCEA than by the government in all 
nine districts of Mauritius. The district of Plaines Wilhems has the highest number of SEN schools, while 
the districts of Black River, Moka, and Savanne have the fewest SEN schools. Here, it is vital to point out that 
the district of Plaines Wilhems has the largest population among the nine districts. It is also worth noting that 
there is no Government Integrated Unit in the district of Black River. SEN schools run either by the govern-
ment or by NGOs/RCEA are distributed throughout the districts of Mauritius.
404
855
107
213
123
182
54
121
51
118
47
101
50
93 
45
63
13
33Plaines Wilhems
Flacq
Port Louis
Rivière du Rempart
Grand Port
Rivière du Rempart
Pamplemousses
Black River
MokaFemale MaleFigure 10: Enrolment in SEN schools by gender and district, 2020
Source: Statistics Mauritius (2020).17
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusThe district of Plaines Wilhems has the highest enrolment in SEN schools while the district of Moka has 
the lowest. These data match that of the distribution of SEN schools in the districts. The enrolment of boys 
exceeds that of girls in all the districts. In six of the districts, the ratio of boys to girls is 2:1 ( Figure 10).
Teaching staff
Administrative 
and ancillary staff
Medical and paramedicalFigure 11: Personnel in SEN schools by gender, 2020
Male Female
448 46
240 85
121 67
Source: Statistics Mauritius, 2020.
In Mauritius, teaching is a female-dominated profession. More than 90 per cent of the teaching staff in SEN 
schools are female. Similar observations are made with regard to the administrative and ancillary school staff, 
as well as the medical and paramedical personnel. See Figure 11.
2018 2019 2020Figure 12: Personnel 
in SEN schools, 
2018–2020
Teaching staff
Administrative 
and ancillary staff
Medical 
and paramedical
444
314
97
469
323
95
494
325
188
Source: Statistics Mauritius (2020).
There was a slight increase in the number of teaching staff, along with an increase in administrative and an-
cillary school staff, from 2018 to 2020 (Figure 12). However, there was a slight drop from 97 to 95 medical 
and paramedical personnel from 2018 to 2019. Then, in 2020, the number nearly doubled in that group. 
COVID-19 and learners with disabilities
According to Prensky (2001), the digital age is the era whereby individuals are grouped based on the period 
they were born and their relationship with digital technologies. Hence, the term ‘digital natives’ was coined 
to denote people born during or after the advent of digital technologies. Kivunja (2014) estimated this digital 
period as being the year 1980 and referred to it as the birth year of the digital natives. 
Digital natives tend to be ‘fluent’ with digital technologies such as computers, video games, email, mobile 
phones, and the internet. Prensky (2001, 1) argued that technology had radically altered the ways that to-
day’s students learn, which explains why they ‘think and process information differently than their prede-
cessors’. In the same year, Prensky (2001) claimed that digital natives are multitasking learners, a sentiment 
echoed by Veinberg (2014). In contrast, those born before that period were referred to as ‘digital immigrants’ 18
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritiusas they lived in an analogue period before moving to a digital world (Joy, 2012)11. Nevertheless, they have em-
braced several aspects of the new technologies and are more likely to take up digital media as a secondary 
source of information (Prensky, 2001). Interestingly, DeGraff (2014)12 claimed that digital natives tend to view 
the world in a way where everyone is equal and that there are no hierarchies or boundaries, while digital 
immigrants are more likely to divide the word into hierarchies and set boundaries driven by structural insti-
tutions such as marriage, religion, and government. 
Key implementers of open and distant learning (ODL) solutions – such as MoETEST, Mauritius Institute of Ed-
ucation (MIE), NGOs, Disabled Peoples’ International (DPI), Special Education Needs Resource and Develop-
ment Centres (SENRDCs), Government Integrated Units (GIUs), and disabled persons’ organizations (DPOs) – 
strongly believe that learners with disabilities deemed to be digital natives are more responsive to technology. 
Indeed, this case study revealed a positive correlation between learners with disabilities and their interactions 
with technology as compared with a negative correlation between some teachers and most parents (catego-
rized as digital immigrants) during the pandemic.
11  https://edition.cnn.com/2012/12/04/business/digital-native-prensky/index.html  
12  https://jeffdegraff.com/blog/2014/06/digital-natives-vs-digital-immigrants/ 19
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusObjectives and methodology
Objectives
The research was guided by the following objectives:
• Outline the main contributions of institutions in facilitating integration of information and communica-
tion technology (ICT) in SEN education during the pandemic crisis.
• Examine the relevance, efficiency, and effectiveness of technological innovations employed in SEN 
education.
• Analyse the major barriers impeding the implementation of ODL solutions in SEN education.
• Determine the promising innovative technological practices and whether they are potentially sustainable 
and replicable in a post-COVID environment.
• Propose policy recommendations to promote and encourage innovative and pervasive use of ODL solu -
tions for learners with disabilities as a post-COVID recovery plan.
The objectives assisted in formulating the following key research questions:
• What were the major contributions of the identified institutions in facilitating integration of ICT in SEN 
education during the pandemic?
• Were the technological innovations employed in SEN education equitable, inclusive, relevant, efficient, 
and effective?
• What are the main barriers impeding the implementation of ODL solutions in SEN education?
• What are the promising innovative technological practices that are potentially sustainable and replicable 
in post-COVID environment? 
• What are the policy recommendations to promote and encourage innovative and pervasive use of ODL 
solutions for learners with disabilities as a post-COVID recovery plan?
Methodology 
The study aimed to understand the relevance, effectiveness, and efficiency of the use of ODL solutions during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. An understanding of these areas is necessary to determine promising innovative 
technological practices and recommend policy interventions for learners with disabilities for sustained ODL 
practice in post-COVID environments. 
A case study method was used, allowing the researcher to investigate the use of ODL solutions for learn-
ers with disabilities during the pandemic, and to formulate recommendations for a post-COVID recovery 
plan for the effective and efficient use of technology in an inclusive and equitable manner. The case study 
approach also enabled the researcher to elicit rich data relating to the range and reach of disability-inclusive 
ODL solutions. This was supported with concrete examples that illustrate the achievements and the challeng-
es encountered in ICT implementation during COVID-19 and was used to recommend a recovery plan for sus-
tained ODL practices in post-COVID environments. 
The two data collection instruments used were online questionnaires, followed by online interviews. 
The participating institutions were MoETEST, NGOs, Government Integrated Units (GIUs), SENRDCs, DPI, 
DPOs, the United Nations, Inclusion Mauritius, and MIE.20
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusFindings
In a bid to provide access to learning opportunities using ODL 
solutions, active participation among a number of institutions 
was evident. Within the government sector, collaboration took 
place among MoETEST, MIE, GIUs, and SENRDCs in partnership 
with Open University and the Mahatma Gandhi Institute. NGOs 
worked in collaboration with Disabled Peoples’ International, 
Service Diocésain de L’Éducation Catholique (SeDEC), DPOs, 
Inclusion Mauritius, ACTogether, and the National Productivity 
and Competitiveness Council. The goal of the collective effort 
was to ensure continuity of learning that is accessible, inclusive, 
and equitable.
Learners with disabilities were able to use ICT to continue 
their studies from home. The enthusiasm, level of confidence, 
and intrinsic motivation of learners engaged them cognitive-
ly in the learning process. In this manner, a gradual change 
in learners’ attitudes towards ICT was noticeable, resulting 
in a positive impact on the learning process. In doing this, most 
of the learners with disabilities were able to incrementally take 
control of their learning. It was observed that learners were 
able to better communicate with their peers; this improved their 
communication and social skills. In contrast with in-school situ-
ations, learners often benefited from the support of additional 
teachers (other than their class teacher) with close monitoring 
from the school and paramedical teams. The emotional support, 
which was crucial for learners with disabilities during the dis-
ruption of the routine school life, together with continuous sup-
port and monitoring, made it possible for these learners to sus-
tain ODL practices.
All key stakeholders concurred with the interventions of ODL 
solutions to democratize access to learning for students with SEN 
and firmly believed that all children should have the same 
rights and opportunities for learning, whether during COVID or 
non-COVID situations. This novel approach to learning will open 
new avenues to the way learners with disabilities learn, assisting 
them in a progressive manner to achieve better results and en-
gage in lifelong learning modalities.
However, the impact of technology on learners with severe 
and profound disabilities was not positive. These learners were 
neither interested nor engaged with the technology. In fact, 
in certain cases, the screen time and exposure to the screen also 
resulted in hyperactive behaviours. 
It is important to highlight that, even in the absence of an ICT 
policy in SEN education, the use of ICT is promoted by SEN 
institutions.
Despite the innovative initiatives of key stakeholders at different 
levels as a response to COVID-19 to ensure continuity of edu-
cation through ODL solutions, a discontinuity of those efforts 
was observed post-COVID. Most of the SEN institutions con-
tinued the conventional mode of teaching and learning upon ‘The use of technology 
was harnessed to motivate 
and engage children in interactive 
learning activities and promoted 
their cognitive and social skills.’
Project officer, NGO.
‘Technology unlocks latent ability 
for those with communication 
difficulties.’
Manager, NGO.
‘Increased ICT confidence 
among students motivates 
them to use the internet at 
home for schoolwork and leisure 
interests.’
The MoETEST team.
‘Technology made it possible 
for lessons to be enhanced 
with individual learning events.’ 
The MoETEST team. 
‘ODL solutions allowed 
teachers a greater flexibility 
to apply differentiation in their 
instruction.’
The MoETEST team.
‘The success of innovative 
attempts to use technology 
is attributed to all who responded 
positively to a sudden change.’ 
Director, NGO.
‘ICT enables greater learner 
autonomy.’ 
The MoETEST team.21
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritiusthe reopening of schools. One of the major reasons cited was 
that Mauritius was declared COVID-safe. However, the cause 
and effect of the disruption of those initiatives were also related 
to non-COVID situations as the existing diverse factors; the lack 
of leadership, resources, training, and willingness to change 
was still impeding the sustainability of ODL practices. It is equal-
ly important to note that the tendency to return to normal life – 
to return to the comfort zone – was considered as a preferable 
option. 
On the other hand, lessons learned from the pandemic enabled 
some NGOs to scrutinize their school teaching and learning strat-
egy of inbuilt ODL solutions to better prepare for uncertainties 
and mitigate any further disruption of education. These NGOs 
are embarking on ODL migration in their organizations from 
the next academic year that aim to view the learner as a whole 
by empowering the immediate SEN community. This phase-wise 
approach consists of an inclusive series of ODL events that will 
be introduced for beneficiaries including teachers, learners, 
school personnel, and parents. The ODL events consist of:
• professional development of trainers in the use of ODL 
solutions,
• training of learners with disabilities in the use of ODL solu -
tions in their learning,
• basic ICT skills short courses for school personnel 
and parents,
• hosting an e-learning portal to connect all stakeholders. 
Taking into consideration the significance of a smooth transi-
tion from the traditional to the ODL mode, distance mode drill 
sessions have also been planned, leading to the actual running 
of distance modes of learning once or twice per month. The 
drill sessions will simulate the actual ODL sessions to under -
stand the operating processes and identify associated opportu-
nities and challenges to further enhancements.
At the level of MIE, a sign language expert has been recruited as 
a resource person to develop inclusive learning resources; vid-
eo productions will also include sign language, for example. In 
addition to this, primary books are being translated into Braille, 
and secondary books will also be translated. It is firmly be-
lieved that translation is the initial step, but a form of adapta-
tion is crucial. Two major changes addressed in (post-COVID) 
SEN teacher education programmes were the mode of deliv-
ery and the method of assessment. Most of the modules were 
conducted on Microsoft Teams, and in some cases social media 
(WhatsApp) and Zoom software were used. The mode of assess-
ment has been adapted to include more coursework and project 
presentation, and a greater use of technology was encouraged 
for assessment of large groups of students.‘Mindset change is a determining 
variable to trigger 
and sustain change.’
Director, MIE.
‘We learnt the hard way and that 
was an opportunity to self-
evaluate and improve further.’
Teacher, NGO.
‘The technology universe 
is constantly evolving 
and transforming 
the world of education. 
As a result, it is crucial 
to understand how to teach 
differently to learners who learn 
differently in this digital age.’ 
Manager, NGO.
‘Wishful thinking is appreciated; 
the right policy is no doubt 
fundamental but a change 
in mindset supersedes all.’
Director, MIE.22
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusWithin the scope of the unprecedented crisis caused by the pan-
demic, and limited access to resources, various ODL solutions 
were initiated at different levels, namely: MoETEST, MIE, NGOs, 
DPOs, and DPI, and at a personal level by teachers to provide ad-
equate and timely support to learners with disabilities. These ef-
forts from different quarters, and at different levels, culminated 
in innovations in technology identified as unique, meaningful, 
impactful, relevant, efficient, effective, and potentially sustaina-
ble in post-COVID environments. 
The SEN Unit of the MoETEST played an instrumental role in en-
suring the continuity of learning for students with disabilities. 
The SEN Unit stepped in at the outbreak of the pandemic and con-
sulted with various stakeholders to support learners with SEN 
effectively and efficiently. The ministry sent an expression of in-
terest to all SEN teachers who wished to participate in the pro-
duction of educational videos; many of them reacted promptly 
and enthusiastically to this request. The SEN Unit encouraged 
SEN teachers to communicate with their pupils and parents 
through e-learning platforms, social groups, and social media. 
A skeleton team was in constant contact with all SEN teachers 
through respective school heads.
The MoETEST entrusted MIE to develop materials for virtual learn-
ing during lockdowns. MIE was at the forefront and was pivotal 
in the design, adaptation, and production of learning materials 
to ensure continuity of learning for learners with disabilities. 
The panel members used WhatsApp and Microsoft Teams 
to communicate and collaborate while producing digital re-
sources. ‘On-the-spot learning’ took place as the SEN panel had 
to master video-making techniques, adapt educational resourc-
es, and produce relevant, activity-based videos to engage learn-
ers with instructional activities. A series of vetting measures was 
inbuilt in the design, development, and implementation phases 
to ensure the delivery of quality videos. The online learning ma-
terials were designed with an evaluation approach in mind where 
diagnostic and formative questions, along with a self-assessment 
grid, were incorporated in the activities. The evaluation element 
of the learning tools and videos consisted of multiple choice or 
structured questions that students were to answer on their own 
in a set time before being given the solution; this allowed them 
to immediately be informed if they had successfully answered or 
not. Other videos, aimed at improving fine motor skills, included 
tests to ensure that students were able to synthesize their knowl-
edge and produce desired final outcomes. These videos were 
broadcast on the national television on weekdays on specific Technological innovations in SEN 
education: Relevance, effectiveness, 
efficiency, impact, and sustainability 
‘Each child has a special need 
and we have to be responsive 
and act responsibly.’
Manager, NGO.
‘We were caught unaware, 
and we were in the learning mode 
as much as in the production 
mode.’ 
Director, MIE.
‘In an unsettled situation, effort 
from everyone is important 
and how to learn differently 
is most essential.’
Teachers, NGO.
‘The pandemic resulted 
in reorienting the role 
of teachers.’
Director, NGO.
‘The SEN panel used 
a lot of ingenuity, creativity, 
and resourcefulness based 
on their own expertise 
to plan network and developed 
video materials.’
Director, MIE.23
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritiuschannels at different times of the day to maximize reach and effi-
ciency.  This further facilitated access to learning for students who 
did not have mobile devices and/or internet connectivity in their 
homes. The videos were also available on the MIE portal, which 
was accessible anytime, and from anywhere. 
Around 32 videos were produced during the confinement peri-
od, varying in terms of grades, levels, subjects, and topics, as 
well as objectives and targeted areas of development. For ex-
ample, some videos targeted primary school readiness and ad-
dressed topics such as Myself, My Senses, My Family, and My 
House. A wider array of videos encompassing prayer, breathing 
exercises, and breathing techniques through demonstration; 
Mother’s Day and Father’s Day; and design techniques for crea-
tive greeting cards for parents were also developed. It is impor-
tant to point out that some of the videos were bilingual (English 
and Creole) to facilitate learners’ understanding. Two informa-
tive videos on COVID-19 were also developed to provide greater 
awareness of COVID-19 and to enable learners with disabilities 
to deepen their understanding about the virus and the precau-
tionary measures that they should be taking. 
The context of NGOs (active members of DPOs or DPI) differed 
given that there was a disparity among leadership of the heads 
of the organizations, existing learning environments, techno-
logical resources, availability of digital tools, number of trained 
teachers in ICT, digital literacy of teachers, and parents, along 
with differences relating to learners’ families and their socio-eco-
nomic backgrounds. Hence, the contributions and experiences 
of each NGO were unique in the use and exploration of ODL 
solutions, both during and after COVID. Not all NGOs were able 
to embrace ODL, as many learners with SEN hailed from vulner-
able families; this hindered access to this novel mode of learn-
ing. Nonetheless, it is worthwhile highlighting that a number 
of NGOs used the support of technology to reach out to learn-
ers, ensuring that they were able to connect with their learning 
at a distance. All the NGOs affirmed that WhatsApp was the most 
appropriate technological tool that was accessible, useful, rele-
vant, effective, and efficient given its ease of use and populari-
ty among parents. In fact, WhatsApp was identified as the tool 
that eased the transition from traditional face-to-face teaching 
to ODL during the lockdown. This substantiated the apprecia-
tion and acceptance level of parents of the new mode of learn-
ing during the pandemic crisis; indeed, the collaboration of par-
ents was key during the confinement period. Similarly, laudable 
initiatives of certain NGOs are acknowledged as these organiza-
tions closely monitored the evolution of the crisis in the world 
and they prepared online teaching and learning strategy also 
referred to ‘Online Learning Strategy’ or ‘Home Schooling Pro-
gramme – Let’s get Digital’ prior to the lockdown in Mauritius.
A set of procedures guided the implementation of this innovative 
approach to teaching and learning. The initial phase involved 
the verification and updating of contact details of all parents, 
teachers, school administration, and paramedical teams. Guid-
ed by the philosophy of distributed leadership style, different ‘As an NGO, we are much freer 
to take action and implement 
it in a much quicker way 
compared with being 
in the government sector.’
Project coordinator, NGO.
‘Every action needs to be legal 
and for the benefit of the school.’
Manager, NGO.
‘We had to embark on 
digital platforms to cope 
with the disruption of traditional 
pedagogical methods amid 
the coronavirus crisis.’
Manager, NGO.24
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusWhatsApp groups with different responsibilities at different 
levels were created, namely: (a) WhatsApp group for parents/
teachers and paramedical team; (b) personalized WhatsApp 
group based on learners’ profile; and (c) WhatsApp control group 
consisting of teachers, school management, and paramedical 
team. Parents were invited and encouraged to start using their 
WhatsApp group twice a week to be updated with school-re-
lated information prior to the announcement of the curfew. 
In certain specific cases, the Zoom application was also used 
by schoolteachers for communicating with some parents. With 
a view to support all learners in an inclusive and equitable man-
ner, teachers prepared homework to be done during the con-
finement period and submitted hard copies of those to learners, 
following up through phone calls as an alternative way to reach 
parents who did not have access to WhatsApp or Zoom in order 
to monitor the progress of those learners. 
The educational activities consisted of parent–child engagement 
activities, fine and gross motor exercise tasks, games, empow-
erment, and fun activities and were done under the guidance 
of the school team in collaboration with parents. It is interesting 
to note that similar efforts were made for learners with disabil-
ities who were in the pre-primary and pre-vocational sections. 
Upon the official announcement of a complete lockdown, ODL 
was initiated by the respective organizations where teachers 
sent the timetables of all classes to the parents and solicit -
ed their support during those sessions. The same philosophy 
of the timetables during school time was practised so as not 
to overly unsettle the learners. 
The first two weeks was the immersion phase. Parents played 
a vital role in the informal learning where they were responsible 
for taking pictures of the completed tasks and videotaping kin-
aesthetic activities and sending these to the teachers. The nor-
mal school calendar was followed, and during the holiday break, 
no online sessions were held. The set goal to ensure continuity 
of learning for students with disabilities in an inclusive and eq-
uitable manner was attained and those organizations involved 
celebrated the technological innovations: they are looking for-
ward to replicating similar approaches in a more reinforced 
manner in the near future.‘The SEN sector is one 
of the sectors which is now 
fast evolving. But the ministry 
is still in the development phase 
of an appropriate curriculum, 
inclusive environment, and also 
recognition of the work of NGOs 
in the SEN sector.’
Manager, NGO. 25
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusOne of the strongest messages attributed to the unprecedent-
ed COVID-19 crisis was the recognition of existing barriers 
constraining successful use and sustainability of technology 
in inclusive and equitable education. Although the government 
has continuously advocated for the integration of technology 
in teaching and learning, the impact has been small. Likewise, 
MIE has also been supportive of this approach but with insignif-
icant effect. 
A number of barriers related to COVID-19 and non-COVID envi-
ronments have been identified at different levels that still hinder 
the effective use of ODL in education of learners with disabili-
ties. These are classified as: 
• physical barriers, where the inclusive ODL learning environ-
ments and digital resources were not accessible; 
• content barriers focusing on technology-supported pedago -
gy, as along with the assessment for and of ODL;
• financial barriers: for example, SEN NGOs face financial 
constraints to cover the cost of technological infrastruc-
ture and specialized hardware and software. The families 
of learners with disabilities are more likely to experience 
socio-economic disadvantage which may impede access 
to digital devices or the internet; 
• cognitive barriers for learners with severe to profound 
disabilities;
• competence and skill barriers where the teaching team 
lacks digital skills to adopt ODL solutions to adapt learning – 
the parents’ lack of knowledge of technology use can also 
prevent them from participating in online activities;
• instructional barriers including leadership of institutions 
and support from them; 
• mindset barriers related to resistance to change and to work 
collectively and attitudes towards technology. 
The importance of urgently addressing these barriers was more 
apparent during the sudden disruption of education caused 
by the pandemic. ‘We cannot succeed if we abide 
by the normal 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. 
teaching hours within the four 
walls of the classroom.’
Director, MIE.
‘Inequality in the SEN sector 
still prevails. Inequality of fund 
distribution and recognition 
of SEN staff in terms of salaries 
and benefits continue to be 
widespread. NGOs do not have 
direct government funding 
to equip all SEN schools 
with required, essential, and basic 
digital tools and facilities. 
Financial support from 
the government is crucial if 
we want to sustain the access 
to technology and learning 
for learners with disabilities.’
Manager, NGO.Barriers in the context of Mauritius26
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusCOVID-19 has revealed vulnerabilities, but at the same time has 
unleashed the resourcefulness, creativity, and critical minds 
of people in all fields including education.
The pandemic pushed teachers to engage in self-learning so 
that they could teach differently in this society as it faced rap-
id technological transformations. Teachers were left on their 
own to infuse their experiences to creatively design and devel-
op adapted pedagogical resources for learners with disabilities 
to engage them in the learning process. Thus, teachers iden-
tified a need for adjustment to their existing practice and en-
rolled in free online courses, explored creative free software, 
and consulted relevant YouTube channels and open education-
al resources (OERs). Inevitably, teachers connected with other 
teachers to share good practices and acted as critical friends. By 
finding the most convenient ways to design, develop, and deliv-
er meaningful, relevant, and interactive lessons as part of ODL, 
a shift from consumers to producers of personalized short vide-
os were observed among many teachers. 
Some other interesting findings in areas of technology and ac-
cess to learning for learners with disabilities relating to post 
COVID-19 recovery for policy and practice were noted:
• exploiting the full potential of technology in SEN education;
• promoting access to quality technological infrastructure 
and hardware and software for the design, development, 
implementation, and delivery of SEN-friendly pedagogical 
resources using ODL solutions;
• the availability of digital devices to learners to access learn -
ing resources and engage in ODL;
• basic training in ICT skills to help parents support their child 
and participate in informal learning remotely;
• encouragement of a collective approach in terms of sharing 
of good practices among SEN institutions.
• effectiveness of providing relevant and current profes-
sional development programmes to teachers to keep pace 
with the changing teaching and learning environments so 
that they might become more confident in using technology. 
It was noted that learners and teachers in NGOs should receive 
the digital devices – such as tablets – as was the case in govern-
ment schools, SENRDCs, and integrated units. It was firmly be-
lieved that there should be an equal sharing of resources among 
all learners and teachers, irrespective of their organizations.COVID-19 and learners with disabilities: 
Post-COVID-19 recovery for policy 
and practice 
‘Mauritius is small and thus 
manageable. If proper policies, 
regulations, and a regulatory 
body are set, wonders can happen 
for learners with disabilities.’
Manager, NGO.‘We should be proactive and see 
how the world is changing, build 
up tools and materials 
which can cater for learners 
with disabilities at a distance.’
Manager NGO.‘COVID-19 brings along the seeds 
of hope to further unlock hu-
man potential, nurture relation-
ships and values in a unified man-
ner and explore new possibilities 
to unlearn so as to relearn.’
Director, NGO.
‘The pandemic crisis calls 
for collective actions.’
Director, NGO.
‘Before COVID-19, I knew 
how to prepare teaching aids 
and used video resources 
mainly from YouTube, but now 
I can confidently produce adapted 
videos for my pupils.’
Teacher, Government 
Integrated Unit.27
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusRecommendations 
for the role of technology for learners 
with disabilities in a post-COVID 
environment/recovery plan in Mauritius 
The identified gaps for sustained ODL solutions in SEN education wer e categorized as:
• national ICT policy for SEN education,
• curriculum design and material development,
• teaching and learning process,
• infrastructure and connectivity,
• professional development,
• school–home partnership,
• quality assurance,
• unified implementation strategy, 
• working with partners. 
The gaps identified were used to write recommendations for improving access to and quality of education 
of students with disabilities during the pandemic with the help of ODL solutions ( Figure 13).
Figure 13: Recommendations for ODL solutions in SEN education
National ICT 
policy for SEN 
education
Adapted SEN 
curriculum
Teaching 
and learning 
continuum
Technological 
infrastructure
Empowering key 
stakeholdersSchool-home 
partnershipQuality  
assuranceUnified 
implementation 
strategyWorking 
with partners28
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusNational ICT policy for SEN education
The Education Act 1957 was amended during the pandem -
ic crisis through the COVID-19 (Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Act 2020 to provide, among other things, for the dispensing 
of distance education and online learning programmes dur-
ing the temporary closure of educational institutions. Although 
this was regarded as a commendable decision, a number 
of recommendations were put forward to ensure that diversi-
ty, access, equity, and inclusion are ingrained in ODL practices. 
The MoETEST should advocate for a national ICT policy for SEN 
education, drafted in consultations with all key stakeholders 
in the SEN sector. This top-down policy decision will strengthen 
technology integration within SEN education.
It was acknowledged that in this digital era, technology is a cat-
alyst for teaching and learning and is associated with several 
benefits for those students who are digital natives. The experi-
ences gained during the pandemic reinforced the understanding 
of the urgent need to implement ODL in current teaching practic-
es. However, it was emphasised that tailor-made ODL solutions 
for specific disabilities should be focussed on the capacity build-
ing of teachers, assistant teachers, carers, and heads of schools – 
and that customized and ongoing training should be a priority. 
It further highlighted that a mindset shift is required to enable 
a smooth transition from the traditional classroom to an ODL in-
tegrated approach within the teaching and learning ecosystem.  
Accessibility, equity, usability, reliability, affordability, efficiency, 
and inclusion – the attributes of quality education – should be 
thoroughly considered when designing any ODL solutions. In 
brief, ODL solutions for learners with disabilities should be guid-
ed by a SEN-centred approach.
Adapted SEN curriculum
In line with the various government initiatives and support for SEN 
education, it has been emphasized that an adapted curriculum 
for SEN learners is long overdue. Hence, an urgent call for rein-
forcing the existing mechanism, where attention should be given 
to incorporating adapted ODL solutions for learners with specific 
disabilities in the new curriculum.  Alongside this, the use and con-
textualization of existing OERs and digitalization of disability-friend-
ly resources should be an integral part of the curriculum. 
An equitable and inclusive approach in the design and develop-
ment is strongly felt to the point that the SEN curriculum panel 
at MIE has to invite panel members on a rotating basis, ensuring 
that diverse perspectives and experiences are incorporated. In 
doing this, a broader number of SEN educators will be trained. 
MIE’s engagement in the translation and of primary books 
in Braille for visually impaired students is viewed as significant. 
However, an inclusive approach should be broadened to include 
all disabilities to democratize access to resources for SEN learn-
ers. Similarly, the integration of sign languages in digital resource ‘The first step in successful 
technology integration 
is recognizing the change that 
may need to happen within us 
and our approach to teaching 
and learning.’
The MoETEST team.29
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritiusproduction is highly recommended. It is also proposed to have 
formative assessments to allow learners to demonstrate learn-
ing in a variety of ways. It is further suggested that guides be 
developed for school leaders, teachers, psychologists, occupa-
tional therapists, and parents to explicitly demonstrate the SEN 
curriculum implementation process and define the roles and re-
sponsibilities of each key stakeholder for a unified and an inte-
gral inclusive approach. Research in making informed decisions 
across all levels should be part of the curriculum and carried out 
in a systematic and timely manner.
Teaching and learning continuum
Experiences gathered from the distance mode of learning adopted 
during COVID-19 has proven that a shift from conventional teach-
ing to ODL is possible. It is highlighted that the type and degree 
of disabilities of learners vary. Hence, teachers’ guides should il-
lustrate a continuum of learning including all cognitive, affective, 
and behavioural changes throughout a wide array of disability-spe-
cific ODL-based activities to guide them in designing and imple-
menting an inclusive learning environment. Moreover, the existing 
individualised educational plan  should be reviewed to integrate 
disability-specific ICT skills and competencies with short-, medium-, 
and long-term objectives to accommodate SEN learners. 
For successful integration of technology, it is strongly advisable 
to have trained teachers, motivated learners; adapted learning 
content, activities, and environment; a supportive school ethos, 
and parental involvement. As such, teachers’ preparedness, 
enhanced confidence, and higher levels of competence in us-
ing ODL solutions in their teaching will be achieved in an in-
cremental manner: this can also positively influence the mind-
set shift of teachers in embracing technology. A community 
of practice should be encouraged and nurtured within school 
culture to promote the sharing of good practices and to create 
new knowledge to advance the domain of professional practice 
in the use of ODL solutions for learners with SEN. The heads 
of SEN schools play a pivotal role in articulating and sustaining 
the collective approach within the school ethos.
To drive this change, school leadership is vital. It was further 
proposed to have regular round tables, regional workshops, 
and international conferences on ODL initiatives in SEN edu-
cation. This unified force with shared goals will bring visibility 
to SEN learners, both regionally and internationally. 
Technological infrastructure
There were recurrent arguments that school technological infra-
structure must be reviewed, reinforced, and measured against 
required quality norms: this contributes to quality ODL practices 
in SEN education. These norms include broadband internet con-
nectivity; robust hardware; software for specific disabilities; lap-
tops or tablets for teachers; and adapted classrooms and mobile ‘Greater consideration 
should be given to the reality 
of the classroom because every 
child is unique, and teaching 
depends on contextual reality.’
Director, MIE.
A manager of an NGO referred 
to ‘the creation of an online hub 
dedicated to the SEN community 
to craft inclusive and equitable 
digital solutions and allow sharing 
and discussion of innovative, 
affordable, and replicable 
approaches.’30
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritiusprojectors. In addition, timely maintenance and upgrading 
of the technological infrastructure is essential for sustainabili-
ty. Heads of schools, together with teaching staff, should devel-
op a school ICT policy which will be derived from the national 
ICT policy for SEN education. This should be an integral part 
of the school development plan. 
Teachers are encouraged to adopt affordable and accessible 
ODL solutions that become enablers of ODL implementation. 
In so doing, these initiatives will lead to a positive working cli-
mate resulting in a responsive culture to ODL practices in ed-
ucation. The development of a SEN portal was strongly recom-
mended to connect all stakeholders, including SEN schools, 
SENRDCs, NGOs, and relevant partners. Access to free internet 
and adapted digital devices for vulnerable families who have 
a child with a disability should be earmarked for the forthcom-
ing budget as a social responsibility to provide equal access 
and learning opportunities. 
Empowering key stakeholders
A diverse education workforce and empowering key stake-
holders across all levels from the micro (school level) to meso 
(community level including parents) and macro levels (ministry 
level) should be in place to support inclusion in SEN education. 
This knowledge-pull approach must be embraced and valued 
in this digital era as successful implementation of ODL solutions 
in SEN education is achieved collectively.  
MIE engagement to upgrade the educational qualifications of SEN 
personnel13 – namely, managers, teachers, assistant teachers, 
and carers – is duly recognized. However, in this digital era, MIE 
is invited to design tailor-made training courses in terms of short 
courses, workshops, and seminars for SEN personnel in ODL solu-
tions that can be replicated and sustained. The personalized con-
tinuous training in disability-specific techno-pedagogy was em-
phasized to boost the confidence and motivation of teachers. As 
a result, they are empowered to become designers of ODL solu-
tions rather than being only consumers of ODL solutions. 
A mix of leadership styles was important in driving and guid-
ing ODL implementation and encouraging the sharing of good 
practices. Also, collaboration of therapists in designing and de-
velopment ODL solutions was highly recommended. In a nut-
shell, SEN institutions should be active learning organizations 
that positively influence the quality of ODL solutions for learners 
with disabilities. The multidisciplinary team engaged with learn-
ers with disabilities should also benefit from capacity build-
ing in ODL solutions. Furthermore, familiarizing the students 
with ODL solutions was viewed equally vital, as there should be 
a smoothing transition from the conventional to the novel ODL 
practice to maintain sustainability. 
13 http://portal.mie.ac.mu/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Special-Educational-Needs-Educational-
Path.pdf .‘We need increased investment 
in the training of educators 
in technology whose roles 
have changed since the start 
of the pandemic.’
Manager, NGO.31
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusParental support and involvement was appreciated during 
the pandemic, as teachers were able to successfully implement 
ODL solutions with their support. This implies that parents 
should be active stakeholders in decision-making for ODL solu-
tions at the level of the institution and training. Thus, informed 
and trained parents will be better equipped to provide addition-
al support for their children at home. 
School–home partnership 
With strong communication, commitment, and relationships built 
on mutual understanding and trust, teachers and parents imple-
mented distance education during the pandemic crisis. This shared 
learning space and responsibility strengthened the connections 
between school and home, creating opportunities for learning 
from home with technological support. Nevertheless, it is ob-
served that the importance of school–home partnership is under-
played. Hence, the parents’ vital role in the learning of their child 
should be acknowledged and valued, and opportunities should 
be created for including parents as informal learning partners.
Quality assurance
The SENA should collaboratively prepare a quality assurance pol-
icy for SEN education with the Health and Wellness directorate, 
Quality Assurance and Inspection Division, MIE, SeDEC, NGOs, 
DPI, Inclusion Mauritius, and DPOs. This document should de-
scribe the quality assurance processes, outcomes, and actions 
in SEN education, and should be available in all SEN institutions.  
Trained personnel should closely monitor all quality processes, 
outcomes, and actions in a timely manner.
Unified implementation strategy
It was agreed that an inclusive approach with a common goal has 
to be adopted by all major stakeholders in the SEN sector to facili-
tate the implementation of ODL solutions. With a dedicated team 
and a unified implementation strategy, the efficiency and effective-
ness of monitoring every child’s educational achievements and emo-
tional behaviour will be a reality. This will contribute to improving 
access, inclusion, and quality of ODL integration in SEN education.
Working with partners
SEN education advocates a strong focus on willingness and collec -
tive decisions and actions. The holistic development of learners 
with disabilities involves partnerships among various stakehold-
ers from education, health, and social services. Within the same 
context, it is highly recommended that a partnership be devel-
oped to support and sustain the integration of ODL solutions 
in SEN education. For instance, medical officers from the health 
services could advice on the type of technology used in SEN ed-
ucation in relation to the type and degree of disability.  ‘We need a strong synergy 
between the civil society 
in the disability sector 
and the government 
to better tackle issues regarding 
the educational needs of SEN 
learners.’
Project and Fundraising 
Manager, NGO.
The NGOs strongly 
felt that partnerships 
among NGOs, ministries, 
and private companies should 
be strengthened.
‘Yes, more than ever, we 
continued ODL solutions 
in the post-COVID environment.’
Project and Fundraising 
Manager, NGO.32
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusConclusion 
In conclusion, this case study has looked at the potential sustain-
ability of ODL solutions as a post-COVID recovery plan by criti -
cally analysing their relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, impact, 
and sustainability during the pandemic, as well as aiming to un-
derstand the barriers impeding their successful implementation 
in both COVID and non-COVID environments. The contributions 
in terms of technological innovations within different layers 
in the education sector with a focus on SEN was scrutinized. One 
of the forceful messages that came through was the strong will 
to embrace technology in SEN education in an inclusive and eq-
uitable manner: the right to education for all also encompass-
es the right to equal resources for all. Key recommendations 
in this shift towards an inclusive ODL learning environment 
were outlined.
The health crisis has not only interrupted traditional schooling 
but has also revealed the inadequacies and inequities in our ed-
ucation system, including the SEN sector. As we move towards 
the COVID-19 recovery phase, it will be critical to reflect and act 
collectively with all partners in the SEN sector in fostering a re-
silient educational ecosystem to better guard against adversity. 
This will include a realignment between resources and needs, 
ensuring that learners with disabilities have equal learning 
opportunities within a supportive learning environment. In 
this sense, it is of paramount importance that government sec-
tors, in close partnership with NGOs, DPI, DPOs, Inclusive Mau-
ritius, and the private sector, react effectively and efficiently 
in regard to the recommendations outlined above. The nature 
of the shared decisions and actions will undoubtedly determine 
the success of the COVID-19 recovery practices.  ‘We still have to perfect our act.’
Director, MIE.33
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusReferences
• DeGraff, J. 2014. Digital Natives vs. Digital Immigrants. THE BLOG, [blog] 16 June. Last accessed January 
2021: https://jeffdegraff.com/blog/2014/06/digital-natives-vs-digital-immigrants/. 
• Deursen, A.J.V. and Dijk, J.A.V. 2014. The digital divide shifts to differences in usage. New media & society, 
[e-journal] 16(3), 507-526. 
• Joy, O. 2012. What does it mean to be a digital native? CNN, [online]. Last accessed January 2021: https://
edition.cnn.com/2012/12/04/business/digital-native-prensky/.
• Mauritius Institute of Education. (2020). Special Educational Needs: Educational Path. Last accessed 
December 2020: http://portal.mie.ac.mu/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Special-Educational-Needs-Educa-
tional-Path.pdf.
• Mauritius. 2016. Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Re -
search. Nine-Year Schooling: Inspiring Every Child. Pont Fer, Phoenix: Open University of Mauritius. Last 
accessed December 2020: https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/nys/Documents/
NYCBE%20Booklet.pdf.
• Mauritius. 2017. Ministry of Education & Human Resources. Norms and Standards for Special Education 
Needs Schools. Pont Fer, Phoenix. Last accessed December 2020:  
https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/Special%20Education%20
Needs/6.%20Norms%20and%20Standards.pdf .
• Mauritius. 2017. Ministry of Education & Human Resources. Salient Features, Inclusive Education for Chil -
dren and Youth with Special Needs in Mauritius. Pont Fer, Phoenix. Last accessed December 2020: 
https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/Special%20Education%20Needs/
Salient%20Features%20Startegy%20Doc%20(1).pdf .
• Mauritius. 2017. Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research. 
Policy Framework and Strategy Document 2017, Inclusive Education for Children and Youth with Special 
Needs in Mauritius: Concept to Reality. Pont Fer, Phoenix. Last accessed December 2020:  
https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/Special%20Education%20Needs/
SEN_Strategy_2017_Final.pdf .
• Mauritius. 2018. Ministry of Education & Human Resources. Special Needs Schools Act. Pont Fer, Phoe -
nix. Last accessed December 2020: https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Docu -
ments/Special%20Education%20Needs/Special%20Education%20Needs%20Authority%20Act.pdf .
• Mauritius. 2019. Ministry of Education and Human Resources, Tertiary Education and Scientific Research. 
Free Education in Tertiary Education Institutions. Pont Fer, Phoenix. Last accessed December 2020: 
https://education.govmu.org/Documents/educationsector/Documents/2019/Communique%20250119.
pdf.
• Mauritius. 2020. Education Statistics: Highlights. Port-Louis: Statistics Mauritius. Last accessed December 
2020: https://statsmauritius.govmu.org/Pages/Statistics/ESI/Education/Edu_Yr20.aspx.
• Mauritius. 2020. National Laws on Labour, social security and related human rights. The Training 
and Employment of Disabled Persons Act 1996. International Labour Organization, NATLEX Database. 
Last accessed December 2020: www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/docs/WEBTEXT/45308/65039/E96MUS01.htm.
• Mauritius. 2021. Prime Minister’s Office. La ministre Daureeawoo réaffirme l’introduction du Disability Bill 
à l’Assemblée nationale. Port-Louis: Government Information. Last accessed December 2020:  Service.
https://gis.govmu.org/News/SitePages/La-ministre-Daureeawoo-r%C3%A9affirme-l’introduction-du-Di-
sability-Bill-%C3%A0-l’Assembl%C3%A9e-nationale.aspx.34
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of Mauritius• Prensky, M. 2001. Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants Part 1. On the Horizon, [e-journal] 9(5), pp.1-6. Last 
accessed June 2019: https://library.mdx.ac.mu .
• UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning. Mauritius: Education and Human Resources Strate-
gy Plan: 2020, issued in 2009. Last accessed November 2020: https://uil.unesco.org/document/
mauritius-education-and-human-resources-strategy-plan-2020-issued-2009 .
• United Nations. Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Last accessed December 2020: https://www.
un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights.
• Veinberg, S. 2014. Digital native’s attitude towards news sources. Public Relations Review, [e-journal] 
41(2), 299-301.35
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusAppendix 
List of interviewees
Mrs Aneeta Ghoorah 
Director
Primary, UNESCO and Curriculum Development and Evaluation
Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology
Dr Neeshti Reetoo
Director, Health and Wellness
Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology
Dr Om Nath Varma
Director
Mauritius Institute of Education
Miss Shabnaz Koodoruth  
Temporary Assistant Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology
Mr Kaviraj Ramdhun 
Senior Inspector
Special Education Needs Unit
Ministry of Education, Tertiary Education, Science and Technology
Mrs Jocelyne Beesoon
Director
Association de Parents d’Enfants Inadaptés de l’île Maurice 
Morcellement Belzim 
Active Member, Inclusion Mauritius
Mrs  Kina Diop
Project and Fundraising Manager
Association de Parents d’Enfants Inadaptés de l’île Maurice (APEIM)
Mrs P Ullagen 
Director
Association of Disability Service Providers
Mrs Atia Sultana
Director
Ranger Foundation Centre36
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusIgnace Marie-Ange Helene de Cazanove
Project Officer
La Fraternite Mauricienne des Malades et Handicapes 
Mr Bondy Poorasveensingh
Manager/Project Coordinator
Southern Handicapped Association
Miss Renooka Beejan
Head of Socio-Economic Development Unit
United Nations Development Programme
Country Office in Mauritius and Seychelles
Ms Pooja Gopee 
Project Head
Inclusion Mauritius
Mr Vijay Lutchman
Deputy Head Teacher/Officer in Charge 
SEN Curriculum Panel Member, MIE
SEN Research and Development Centre
Mrs Lalima Munnee
SEN Educator
SEN Curriculum Panel Member, MIE
J.T. Ramsoondar Government School (Government Integrated Unit)
Mrs Ferozia Hosaneea
Disability Rights Activist37
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusAbout the author
Anuradha Gungadeen is Senior Lecturer in Open and Distance Learning, Centre for Open and Distance Learn-
ing, at the Mauritius Institute of Education. She served as a member of the National Education Reform Com-
munication Committees during 2015–2016 and was the recipient of a number of prestigious fellowships. Her 
research interest focuses on emerging technologies for affordable, inclusive, and sustained education. 38
COVID 19, technology-based education and  disability: The  case of MauritiusIITE/2021/PI/2