The Universal
Periodic Review 
and its potential to foster 
freedom of expression, 
access to information 
and safety of journalists
GUIDELINES FOR
UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS
I. What is the UPR?
The Universal Periodic Review, (hereafter the UPR), is 
a State-driven, peer review mechanism created by the 
UN General Assembly in 2006 and conducted by the UN 
Human Rights Council in Geneva to ensure that every 
State reports on its compliance with its human rights 
commitments on a regular basis. The UPR is a universally 
applicable tool, in the same way as the 2030 Agenda is.  
It is UNIVERSAL because all 193 Member States of 
the UN must report on their human rights obligations. 
It is PERIODIC  because each State must come before 
the Human Rights Council every 4.5 years. And it is a 
REVIEW because the reports presented by each State 
are reviewed at a meeting with the UPR Working Group 
(composed of the 47 Member States of the Human Rights 
Council), assisted by groups of three States (known as 
“troikas”) who serve as Rapporteurs.    
The UPR process began in 2006 and has held three cycles 
since then. The Third Cycle began in May 2017 and ends 
in 2022. The Fourth Cycle is expected to start in October 
2022.  In order to cover all 193 States within every 4.5-
year cycle, the Human Rights Council holds three UPR 
Working Group Sessions annually to review some 42 
States per year, that is 14 States per session. Currently, 
detailed UPR calendars and other useful information 
regarding OHCHR documentation, regional workshops 
and media outreach can be found here .2
CI-2021/FEJ/UPR/1ABOUT
These Guidelines aim at 
providing UN Country 
T eams (UNCTs) with 
practical advice on how 
the UPR exercise can be 
used to promote access to 
information, freedom of 
expression and the safety of 
journalists.1
1 UNESCO Field Offices plus a range of UNCTs in all regions were consulted when 
seeking background information for these Guidelines.  We particularly appreciate the 
feedback provided by Resident Coordinators’ Offices in Chile, Indonesia, Malawi, Para-
guay, The Philippines, and Timor Leste.
GUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS1II: How does the UPR process work? 
The UPR cycle has three distinct phases, namely prior to the review, during the review and 
after the review. 
Prior to the Review
• Every State is placed on a schedule so that all interested parties are informed well in 
advance of when it is to be reviewed during the upcoming UPR cycle. During this 
stage three different documents are prepared. 
• The three reports are equally important as they are meant to offer a comprehensive 
overview of the human rights situation in the country: 
a) A report presented by the State (known as the National report).
b) A report of information provided by the UN entities, including Treaty 
Bodies, UNCTs and individual agencies, funds and programmes, which is 
compiled by OHCHR (known as Compilation of UN information). 
c) A report of information from national human rights institutions, regional 
bodies, and NGOs, compiled by OHCHR (known as Summary of Stakeholders’ 
information). The three reports are made publicly available in advance of the 
review of each State.  
During the Review
• The Review itself is held in Geneva and consists of a 3.5-hour interactive dialogue with 
the UPR Working Group, which is broadcast live on UN WebTV and can be viewed by 
anyone. 
• The Government concerned has an opportunity to present its national report, after 
which Member States may ask questions and propose recommendations. These 
recommendations are included in an outcome document on which the State under 
review may make preliminary comments, choosing to either “accept” or “note” the 
recommendations. During the UPR process 
Member States must report 
on compliance with their 
human rights obligations and 
commitments as set out in: 
• The UN Charter
• The Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights
• Human rights instruments to which 
the State is party (e.g. human rights 
treaties it has ratified).
• Voluntary pledges and commitments 
made (e.g. national human rights 
policies and/ or programmes 
implemented).
• Applicable international 
humanitarian law.Prior to
During 
the 
reviewAfter
the 
reviewTHE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists2
III: Why is the UPR process relevant to the work of UNCTs?
UNCTs have a crucial role to play in promoting the 2030 Agenda, leveraging forward 
movement on the SDGs and highlighting a human-rights based approach to development 
as a guiding principle of the Agenda. 
UNCTs on the ground work daily with State and non-state actors, and have access to 
current, detailed information, covering a broad range of social issues across urban and 
rural areas and different social sectors, especially within communities deemed most 
vulnerable. Their work in-country is the result of an ongoing dialogue with the State, 
consolidated within the UN Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) (now 
renamed  UN Sustainable Development Framework UNSDF), and with broad sectors of 
society. As such, UNCTs are generally able to bring a variety of social actors together to 
advance on national commitments.   
As the result of a universal process, one in which States are reviewed alongside all 
others, UPR recommendations, once accepted by Governments, are unique in offering 
a consensual avenue to advancing on human rights commitments. UNCTs can assist 
both state and non-state actors to understand the UPR process, encourage training 
and dialogue sessions before the review, provide access to live coverage of the review 
itself and promote compliance with recommendations after.  The cyclical dialogues and 
recommendations provided by the UPR process can both kick-off and enrich national 
discussions on broader development issues. • The State cannot “reject” recommendations but can provide comments on “noted” 
recommendations, including explanations on why they do not support them. The 
final report is adopted at a plenary session of the Human Rights Council some three 
months later.  At the plenary, the State under Review is allotted 20 minutes to make 
a final statement, provide its final answers to recommendations and describe plans 
for implementation.  A total of 20 minutes is also allotted to States that have made 
recommendations and to Civil Society Organizations. 
After the Review
• Between the end of one review and the start of the next, States are to take practical 
steps to implement recommendations that were accepted. States, stakeholders, and UN 
entities can, on a voluntary basis, submit midterm reports or annual updates to reflect 
the current situation and the extent to which recommendations are being fulfilled.  
As the result of a universal process, one 
in which States are reviewed alongside 
all others, UPR recommendations, once 
accepted by Governments, are unique in 
offering a consensual avenue to advancing 
on human rights commitments. GUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS3
Prior to the Review
• This preparatory phase is invaluable as it offers the opportunity for all stakeholders 
in the State under review to re-examine earlier reports and compliance with 
recommendations issued in prior cycles, to take stock of the current situation, 
and to gather the information to be reflected in the three reports listed above. 
During this time UNCTs, most frequently coordinated by a Human Rights Adviser 
belonging to the RC’s Office and through a Human Rights Working Group, 
can provide information and guidance to Governments and encourage them to 
convene participatory national consultation processes as a basis for preparing the 
national report; UNCTs in coordination with other relevant UN entities focus on 
preparing the UN compilation report and also aim to strengthen the capacity of 
national human right’s bodies, civil society organizations and NGOs to prepare 
their own submissions, providing training opportunities and convening dialogues 
wherever possible.  
During the Review
• During the Review, the UN can encourage a comprehensive state and civil society 
presence in Geneva, facilitate contacts with recommending states and international 
NGOs, while UNCTs or OHCHR local offices can arrange live public screenings 
and media coverage for stakeholders, thus making the Geneva process tangible 
“back home” and promoting further civil society engagement and discussion of the 
human rights issues being raised.  
After the Review
• This is the implementation part of the cycle, during which the State reviewed is 
expected to turn recommendations which it has accepted on paper into concrete 
policies on the ground. The peer element of the UPR recommendations means 
that States may be more willing to move forward, even on delicate issues not 
raised elsewhere. The role of the UN in the field is central in supporting States 
and national human rights mechanisms to cluster recommendations, to develop 
strategies and capacities to implement changes, especially around issues considered 
sensitive, and to provide information on training and funding available to help 
countries implement recommendations emanating from the UPR. This is also a 
time to integrate the strategies designed to advance on UPR recommendations into 
other development mechanisms (CCA, UNDAF / UNSDF). 
There is a wealth of information for UNCTs on how to maximize the use of the UPR 
process at the country level.
• The UN Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG) provides a basic one-page checklist 
for UNCT engaging with the UPR.  
• The UNSDG has also published a booklet on how the UPR is relevant to the work of 
UNCTs: 
 
• OHCHR´s practical guidance  on the use of the UPR at a country level focuses on 
dovetailing the enhancement of human rights with Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs), and the prevention and sustaining peace agendas. THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists4IV. Does increased respect for human rights have an impact on 
sustainable development?
There is a strong correlation between the human rights issues that emerge in a UPR exercise 
and the ongoing work of UNCTs to move forward on the SDGs. 
“Human Rights are core to the 2030 Agenda and 
sustainable development is a powerful vehicle for the 
realization of all human rights.”
 UN Deputy Secretary-General, Amina Mohammed 
at the 40th session of the Human Rights Council on 7 March 2019.
 
While the 2030 Agenda is not a legally binding instrument, the human rights obligations on 
which Member States must report through the UPR process are binding. Hence, working 
to comply with UPR recommendations that have been accepted by reviewed States can be 
a smoother entry point to improvement in development goals, especially on issues deemed 
sensitive.  
The 2030 Agenda commitment to “Leave no one behind” is rooted in a basic premise of 
equality and non-discrimination and its achievement depends heavily on citizens’ ability to 
be informed and to participate in national affairs in a safe and meaningful way. 
V. Why is it important for UNCTs to focus on issues pertaining to access 
to information, freedom of expression and the safety of journalists and to 
include them in UPR reports?
Freedom of expression and the right to receive and impart information is a fundamental 
human right enshrined in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
“Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to 
hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas 
through any media and regardless of frontiers. ”
Given that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has, in turn, inspired the adoption 
of more than seventy human rights treaties now applied on a permanent basis at global 
and regional levels, it is not surprising that the issue of freedom of expression and related 
matters should be relevant to the work and recommendations of the UPR.  
The issues are not only rights in themselves, but are also recognised as integral to progress 
in the Sustainable Development Goals which aspires, interalia to promote peaceful and 
inclusive societies. 
SDG 16 “Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions” 
strives to:
 “Promote peace and Inclusive societies for 
sustainable development, provide access to 
justice for all and build effective, accountable 
and Inclusive institutions at all levels.”  GUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS5Among the targets to achieve SDG 16 is 16.10: 
“Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with 
national legislation and international agreements”.   
This target reflects the fact that freedom of information is the touchstone of all other 
human rights. Access to information is crucial to ensuring transparency, which is both 
an end in itself, and a means of empowering the public to more effectively engage in their 
own development.  Among the range of activities to move SDG 16 forward are Normative 
support, Policy advice, Comprehensive data collection and Capacity development and 
technical assistance.
In turn, the indicators to reflect compliance with target 16.10, or lack thereof, include the 
following: 
16.10.1 Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, enforced disappearance, arbitrary 
detention and torture of journalists, associated media personnel, trade unionists and 
human rights advocates in the previous 12 months.
As well as:
16.10.2 Number of countries that adopt and implement constitutional, statutory and/or 
policy guarantees for public access to information. 
However, in its overview of SDG 16, the Sustainable Development Goals Report  for 2020 
reflects progress in the adoption of freedom of information laws but emphasizes that 
much more remains to be done:
“The right to information held by public authorities is an integral aspect of freedom of 
expression and serves as a mechanism to support government openness and accountability as 
well as enhanced empowerment and equality among all social groups. Progress is being made 
in ensuring this right through policies and binding laws. Such laws have now been adopted 
by 127 countries, with at least 27 adopting guarantees since 2014. However, of 73 public 
authorities surveyed, only 58 per cent provided specialized training on the right to information 
for their information officers. The same percentage reported publishing guidelines for requests 
for the public. Survey results indicate that oversight and appeals bodies (as opposed to multi-
purpose bodies) should be essential components of access-to-information law enforcement and 
specialized entities. ”  
The same report reflects the continued need to protect human rights defenders, 
journalists, and trade unionists from violent attacks: 
“ Across all regions, people defending the human rights and fundamental freedoms of others 
are the targets of violent attacks. From 2015 to 2019, the United Nations recorded at least 
1,940 killings and 106 enforced disappearances of human rights defenders, journalists and 
trade unionists across 81 countries, with over half of killings occurring in Latin America 
and the Caribbean. In 2019, 357 killings and 30 enforced disappearances were reported in 
47 countries. While the 2019 toll constitutes the lowest number of killings of journalists per 
year in over a decade, journalists are increasingly experiencing verbal and physical attacks, 
including online, in connection with their work. Women journalists in particular are targeted 
by online harassment. This is underscored by a marked rise in widespread hostile rhetoric 
directed at the media and journalists”.
In short, although access to information, freedom of expression and the safety of journalists 
are firmly enshrined rights in universal instruments and referred to in many national laws, 
they require constant review at the country level to ensure they exist beyond paper and are 
functioning to serve citizens.  Positive changes in these matters can also have far reaching 
impact on related areas such as good governance, transparency, and accountability. THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists6Given this context, the Secretary-General’s Call to Action for Human Rights, launched 
before the Human Rights Council in February 2020, makes public participation and civic 
space priority areas, and stresses the UN’s role in protecting and promoting civic space  
more consistently across the System. 
VI. How can UNCTs highlight freedom of expression and access to 
information in the UPR process? 
While freedom of expression and access to information are fundamental rights enshrined 
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and SDG 16 provides a broad range of 
activities to promote them, the 2020 SDG Report reveals that there are still places around 
the world where these rights are denied or obstructed. UPR recommendations may be 
supported but then not acted upon. Access to information legislation may be enacted 
but then drown in procedural obstacles, thereby remaining purely theoretical. News 
outlets, both traditional and internet-based, that are critical of official policies may be 
crippled by high taxation, censored, or forced to close. Attacks on journalists, including 
by state actors, may be continuing with impunity, making a mockery of the rule of law, 
weakening public trust in the state and undermining the credibility of elections. Systems 
for official monitoring and voluntary reporting about such attacks may be non-existent 
or under-functioning. Similarly, public requests for official information may be refused, 
ignored, or delayed for years. In some cases, this is due to a lack of an efficient information 
management system, yet in others it is rooted in a longstanding culture of secrecy and lack 
of accountability. State actions vis-a-vis internet companies may exceed the threshold of 
legitimate limitations on freedom of expression; alternatively, States may be using these 
channels to engage in disinformation that may violate a range of human rights.  
Graphic: The Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just and Inclusive Societies, ‘Enabling 
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda through SDG 16+: Anchoring peace, justice and inclusion’ , United 
Nations, New Y ork, 2019, available at: https://www.sdg16hub.org7GUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS
There are a variety of ways in which UNCTs can try to promote access to information 
and freedom of speech using the framework of the UPR process, such as the following:  
PREPARING FOR the UPR:
  Convene an internal UNCT discussion to examine the merits of including 
freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists’ issues in 
its human rights strategy and the forthcoming compilation of UN information 
report to the UPR. 
  Check possible points of synergy with the country's Voluntary National Review 
(VNR) process for the UN High-Level Forum on the SDGs, where Access to 
Information is reported under Goal 16, indicator 16.10.2.
  Ensure that the Human Rights Working Group reviews existing national 
legislation or practice on these issues and relevant recommendations accepted 
or noted (with or without comment) by the State in the previous UPR cycle. 
Investigate the extent to which the State recognises the value of official moni-
toring of these specific rights, including within the framework of reporting on 
SDG and UPR progress
  If there are evident shortcomings in-country but no UPR recommendations 
on these issues were made, or if recommendations were merely noted (i.e. not 
supported), approach national authorities to test the waters; where possible 
make the case for moving forward on new or improved legislation and practice, 
noting that transparency and freedom of speech are key to good governance, 
and stressing the links between human rights and the SDGs.  
  When advising national authorities in assessing progress on access to informa-
tion, refer to UNESCO's reporting tool  on Public Access to Information (SDG 
16.10.2).
  If recommendations were accepted by the State, provide advice on how to 
enhance the existing human rights protection system in this area, including 
creating or strengthening crucial oversight or appeals bodies. Specifically en-
gage existing oversight bodies (for example, Information Commission/er, Data 
Protection Commission/er, National Human Rights Institute, Ombudsman etc) 
to evaluate progress or regress on the issue of access to information.  
  Consider facilitating a broad dialogue with executive, legislative and judicial 
authorities, academics, CSOs and media representatives to review existing 
information and freedom of expression laws and their practical application 
before next UPR cycle. Encourage in-country networks and alliances to con-
tribute to the dialogue.
  Throughout the process be mindful that in some contexts working with rep-
resentatives of national human rights institutions or NGOs on freedom of 
expression issues may subject them to intimidation and reprisals.  Be cautious 
and seek advice from OHCHR and its specialists on cases of intimidation and 
reprisals for cooperation with the UN in the field of human rights. 
  Throughout the process, maintain a smooth working relation with both tradi-
tional and digital media representatives to ensure that the UPR is recognized as 
a useful entry point for the promotion of access to information and freedom of 
speech and guarantees for journalists to do their jobs safely. 8  Celebrate the International Day for Universal Access to Information (28 Sep-
tember) by convening public events and calling stakeholders to speak on the 
matter. The relevance of the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes 
Against Journalists (2 November) is another occasion to link UPR with safety 
of journalists and the rule of law.
  In cases where counterparts cite financial challenges and/or lack of oversight 
mechanisms as the reasons for lack of progress, assist national authorities to 
find avenues for multilateral or bilateral cooperation with States that have good 
practices or technical know-how on information and related issues.  Look into 
the OHCHR’s UPR Voluntary Fund  which may be able to provide direct sup-
port to Governments as well as regional workshops on UPR preparation and 
implementation of recommendations.   (In 2019, the Fund provided support 
to OHCHR field presences for activities in Afghanistan, Argentina, Cambodia, 
Costa Rica, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mauritania, Mozambique, Nigeria, North 
Macedonia, Peru, Samoa and Uruguay). 
  In full coordination with OHCHR, provide civil society counterparts, including 
media representatives, with information about UPR-Info,  an NGO with Spe-
cial Consultative Status with ECOSOC that provides online training tutorials, 
Pre-Sessions that replicate the UPR process and other follow-up guidance to 
strengthen civil society engagement.   
  Consider raising with the government the possibility of cooperation or visits 
through special procedures of the Human Rights Council, for instance, the 
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of freedom of opinion 
and expression. 
  Meanwhile, if official information on human rights matters is not readily 
available, consider working with national experts on a collection of booklets, 
to be launched at staggered press conferences and issued as a UNCT collection. 
Ensure that the booklets are translated into local languages and reach disadvan-
taged population groups.
  THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists
In some contexts, working with 
representatives of national 
human rights institutions or 
NGOs on freedom of expression 
issues may subject them to 
intimidation and reprisals.  Be 
cautious and seek advice from 
OHCHR and its specialists 
on cases of intimidation and 
reprisals for cooperation with 
the UN in the field of human 
rights. 
photo: 
Shutterstock/Rob Boc9GUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS
DURING the UPR SESSION: 
  Prior to and during the UPR session, encourage national stakeholders to work 
with recommending States to ensure that recommendations address the spe-
cific shortcomings of the State. Remind them that recommendations to merely 
“improve freedom of speech” are too broad to assess compliance.  
  Consider a representative UNCT attendance in Geneva for the Working Group 
session or making an oral statement at the HRC plenary session. 
  Encourage significant local media coverage of the UPR Working Group Ses-
sion and the involvement of media heads, journalists’ unions, correspondents’ 
associations in related events. 
  Bring Geneva “closer to your capital” . Organize a live streaming or recorded 
showing of the UPR session (according to time differences) for all stakeholders 
to attend and a post-screening discussion of the issues raised. 
AFTER the UPR SESSION:
  Hold another live streaming event of the HRC plenary held some months later 
to move Government, stakeholders’ and the UNCT’s focus to a timeline and 
discussion of the implementation stage. 
  Hold a press conference after the adoption of the report to draw attention to 
the recommendations the Government has accepted and the areas in which 
civil society is willing and able to cooperate.  
  Consider requesting OHCHR and/or UNESCO to provide training to govern-
ment officials and stakeholders on practical steps to be taken. 
  Engage parliamentarians, judicial representatives, academia and media to fol-
low up on legislative steps and legal action required. 
  Invite Embassies, especially those of States that issued recommendations to 
provide follow up to their capitals and a sense on the ground that the interna-
tional community is monitoring progress. 
  Cross reference the UPR process and its recommendations in the context of 
other exercises (CCA, UNSDF, VNR etc). THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists10VII. The safety of journalists
According to UNESCO, a journalist is killed on average every four days when working to 
provide information to the public.  While most people assume these deaths occur in high 
profile contexts of armed conflict, the facts reveal that there is a consistent rise in attacks 
against local journalists covering social protests, environmental crimes, corruption, or 
political wrongdoing.  Many of the murders are committed by organized crime groups, 
militias, security personnel or police. As the perpetrators are seldom brought to justice, 
the cycle of violence and impunity continues.  Across the world, journalists subject to 
harassment, threats, abduction, arbitrary detention, and other harmful situations must 
often resort to self-censorship or exile to survive.   
While there are fewer women journalists than men among those killed, they tend to 
be particularly targeted through on and off-line gender- based attacks ranging from 
harassment, trolling and doxing2, as well as physical and sexual assault.  UNESCO and the 
International Center for Journalists recently conducted a global survey entitled “Online 
Violence against women journalists” , which highlights the issue. 
To mark International Women’s Day 8 March 2021, UNESCO also stressed the need to 
prevent online violence aimed at women journalists.
The UN System’s overarching mechanism to strive for a safe environment for media 
workers is the multi-stakeholder UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the 
Issue of Impunity , led by UNESCO and endorsed in 2012 by the UN Chief Executives 
Board.  Similarly, at country level, the UN Plan encourages the setting up of mechanisms 
for the prevention and punishment of attacks on journalists, and for their protection in the 
face of threats.   
2 "Trolling" usually designates the range of acts of online abuse. “Doxing” is the practice of obtaining and publishing private 
and identifiable information about individuals, usually with malicious intent.
The largest number of fatal attacks on journalists
occurred in:
• Latin America and the Caribbean region (23 Killings) representing 40% 
of  the total killings registered worldwide.
• Asia and the Pacific region (15 killings) with 26% of the killings. 
• Arab States (10 killings) with 18% of killings.Graphic from the 
2020 Highlights 
of the UNESCO 
Director-General’s 
Report on the 
Safety of Journalists 
and the Danger of 
Impunity.Killings of journalists by region in 2019 according to UNESCO’s dataGUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS11In addition, UNESCO maintains an Observatory of killed journalists , while the Director- 
General presents an analytical report on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity 
every two years which analyses information voluntarily received from Member States on 
the judicial status of cases of killed journalists.  The November 2020 Report is available 
here ,  as are videos, and a mobile-friendly version of the report and videos based on the 
premise “Protect Journalists, Protect the truth” . 
Similarly, UNESCO continues to highlight the essential role of the judiciary in ending 
impunity for crimes against journalist. 
Given that threats to journalists have risen in recent years due to a surge of social protests 
and the frequent use of unlawful force by security forces, UNESCO has also issued the 
online brief on “Safety of Journalists Covering Protests: preserving freedom of the press 
during times of turmoil” , which describes existing threats and good practices to counter 
them. 
VIII. How can the UNCT contribute to the 
safety of journalists? 
  Build a working relationship between the UNCT and a variety of journalists 
and stress the importance of a free media in interactions with the government 
and other stakeholders. 
  Promote multi-stakeholder cooperation on the safety of journalists, in line with 
the recommendations in the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and 
the Issue of Impunity
  Consult the Resource Kit created in 2021 by UNESCO and OHCHR as part of 
the UN Plan of Action, which aims to empower UN managers and teams to 
contribute to a free and safe environment for journalists and media workers. 
  Encourage media coverage of the UN’s work both in State-driven projects and 
within civil society networks to drive home the point that national commit-
ments require inclusive dialogue, broad participation, and transparency in 
their undertaking.  
  Publicly mark international days that honour the media as a key sector of so-
ciety, namely World Press Freedom Day (3 May), as mentioned above, and the  
International Day to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists (2 Novem-
ber) .  
  In countries where libel or defamation laws are particularly restrictive, explore 
with national authorities the possibility of studying legal reforms that are less 
stringent on journalists. 
  Be alert to strained relations between the media and security forces, especial-
ly in volatile situations such as social protests or tense electoral settings.  If 
clashes are frequent, consider approaching national authorities to work on the 
necessary balance between public order and the right to freedom of expression. 
  Explore working with law enforcement to stress the importance of respecting 
the media and protecting journalists against attack.  UNESCO offers online 
and on the ground training programmes  targeting members of security forces 
and the judiciary on the importance of freedom of speech and the advantages 
of establishing a professional relationship with the media. These training cours-
es are being implemented in Latin America, Africa and the Arab States and are 
especially useful in the run up to electoral periods. THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists12  Consult the UNESCO observatory of killed journalists to see whether the 
country has responded to UNESCO’s request for information on the judicial 
follow-up on the killing of journalists. Include this information in UPR report-
ing as well as in suggested recommendations.
  Many countries reply to UNESCO’s invitation to provide information on ac-
tions to improve the safety of journalists and combat impunity, but it is import-
ant that their assertions be based on visible realities on the ground.  Should the 
facts be different, the UNCT should reflect the situation in the Compilation of 
UN information presented to the UPR.  
  Be sensitive to indications that journalists may be at serious risk. In some 
cases, UNESCO has worked with national authorities and international NGOs 
to install hotlines and other protective measures to prevent further violence 
against journalists.  
  Be aware that women journalists may be particularly targeted through offline 
and online gender-based attacks.
  Should the UNCT be aware of impending threats against specific journalists, 
approach OHCHR and UNESCO for guidance on how to proceed.   
  Stress the crucial role of the judiciary in ending impunity in crimes against 
journalists. Use the UPR report to reflect landmark judicial decisions  in coun-
try that promote prosecution of crimes against journalism.  These precedents  
can spark further good practices in the country and elsewhere, especially 
where impunity has been the norm. 
  Ensure that major consensual recommendations adopted at training sessions 
on freedom of expression, access to information and the safety of journalists 
are reflected in reports to the UPR and that there is follow up on the ground.
photo: 
Shutterstock/Camera craftGUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS13IX. Freedom of expression and disinformation
The Foundational Primer on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development , which aims 
to establish a common approach for the UN system in supporting the 2030 Agenda, notes 
that “all means of communication, including digital and traditional media, are essential 
channels for broadening awareness of the SDG, including among vulnerable groups. ”  It 
also stresses that “to ensure accountability and enable public scrutiny, institutions at all 
levels have to be open and candid in the execution of their functions, and promote access to 
information, with limited exceptions as provided by law. 
Y et it also warns that new technologies can pose “security and trust-related issues” . And 
it states: “Cybersecurity and protecting human rights, data safety and privacy are key 
concerns. ”
The need to take stock of the darker side of communication is currently being addressed 
in many fora.  Among relevant studies are “Countering Digital Disinformation while 
respecting Freedom of Expression” ,  the September 2020 joint research report issued by the 
ITU/UNESCO Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development: as well as UNESCO 
policy briefs under the title “Combating the disinfodemic: Working for truth in the time of 
COVID-19”  
Disinformation is not necessarily a form of expression that violates rights, even if its 
impact on individuals and sustainable development goals can be harmful. Criminalising 
falsehoods, however, raises risks of state over-reach and violation of legitimate expression, 
especially in regard to public debate about science and policy where veracity is not always 
clear-cut. Democracy and accountability of states can thus be undermined by regulatory 
responses to disinformation which fail the test of legal narrowness, proportionality and 
legitimate purpose. There are, however, many alternatives for states to promote information 
over disinformation. Examples are enhanced right to information systems, support 
for independent media and journalists, transparency requirements for how Internet 
companies curate and moderate content, and resourcing for media and information literacy 
programmes.
X.  In Closing
Freedom of expression and access to information are fundamental rights enshrined in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and, together with the safety of journalists, 
specifically promoted in the 2030 Agenda’s SDG 16.  Y et there are still many places around 
the world where these rights are denied, obstructed, or limited, thereby curtailing crucial 
participatory citizenship in national affairs. There are a number of UN mechanisms 
designed to promote these issues, most recently the Secretary-General’s Call for Action on 
Human Rights (February 2020), the UN Guidance Note on the protection and promotion 
of civic space (September 2020), and the Resource Kit for UN Staff by the UN Focal Points 
Network on Safety of Journalists (2021). 
The daily efforts of UNCTs, especially through Human Rights Working Groups, to promote 
and protect vibrant civic spaces will be strengthened if normative steps and participatory 
processes are merged and reflected in the various stages of the UPR framework, as 
proposed in these Guidelines.  Once accepted by Governments, UPR recommendations are 
unique in offering a consensual avenue to advancing on human rights commitments, an 
avenue that the UN System is well equipped to foster.  THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists14XI. Bibliography
UN References:
• https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/UPRMain.aspx 
• https://www.undocs.org/A/HRC/44/19
• https://unsdg.un.org/2030-agenda/strengthening-international-human-rights/universal-periodic-
review
• https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2020/goal-16/
• https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Reprisals/Pages/OHCHRsWorkOnReprisals.aspx
• Secretary-General’s Call to Action for Human Rights (2020) :   https://www.un.org/en/content/
action-for-human-rights/index.shtml
• https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/CivicSpace/UN_Guidance_Note.pdf
UNESCO Publications and Resources:
• Fostering Freedom of Expression - https://en.unesco.org/themes/fostering-freedom-expression
• UNESCO’s work and resources on safety of women journalists - https://en.unesco.org/themes/
safety-journalists/women-journalists
• The UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity - https://en.unesco.
org/un-plan-action-safety-journalists
• Protect journalists, protect the truth: a brochure for the International Day to End Impunity 
for Crimes against Journalists  - https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374738; https://
en.unesco.org/themes/safety-journalists/observatory  
• Safety of journalists covering protests: preserving freedom of the press during times of turmoil 
-  https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374206
• Balancing Act: Countering Digital Disinformation While Respecting Freedom of Expression - 
https://www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/working-groups/FoE_Disinfo_Report.pdf
• Combating the disinfodemic: Working for truth in the time of COVID-19 - https://en.unesco.
org/covid19/disinfodemic
• The Right to Information in Times of Crisis: – Saving Lives, Building Trust, Bringing Hope - 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374369
• Guidelines for Prosecutors on cases of crimes against journalists - https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000375138
• From promise to practice: access to information for sustainable development;2020 UNESCO 
report on the monitoring and reporting of SDG indicator 16.10.2 (Public access to information) 
- https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000375022 
• UNESCO Survey on Public Access to Information (SDG Indicator 16.10.2) - Manual - https://
en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/instruction_manual_survey_public_ati_en.pdf 
Other references:
• UPR-INFO:   https://www.upr-info.org/en
• ARTICLE 19: https://www.article19.org/what-we-do/
• COMMITTEE TO PROTECT JOURNALISTS: https://cpj.org/
• DANISH INSTITUTE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS:  SDG-Human Rights Data Explorer:  https://
sdgdata.humanrights.dk/
• FREE PRESS UNLIMITED:  https://www.freepressunlimited.org/en
• IFEX:  https://ifex.org/
• REPORTERS WITHOUT BORDERS: https://rsf.org/en
• CENTRE FOR LAW AND DEMOCRACY: https://www.law-democracy.org/live/ 15About the author
Denise Cook Maude was a journalist in Radio Nacional de España and El Pais before joining the United Nations in 
1987. Her 30-year UN career has spanned public information, political analysis and conflict prevention, with a focus 
on peace processes and human rights in the Americas. As UN Resident Coordinator in Uruguay, a Delivering as One 
pilot country, her work centred on a coordinated UN system approach to the 2030 Agenda and the reinforcing of 
universal human rights. 
Published in 2021 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France ©UNESCO. This document is available in 
Open Access under the Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) License. By 
using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of 
the UNESCO Open Access Repository. The designations employed and the presentation of 
material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or 
of its authorities, or concerning the delimation of its frontiers or boundaries. The ideas and 
opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those
of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. 
