IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°2 / 2021
As part of its research project on ‘Open 
government (OG) in education: Learning 
from experience’, the UNESCO International 
Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP) has 
prepared five thematic briefs illustrating 
various forms of OG as applied to the 
education field: open government, open 
budgeting, open contracting, open policy-
making and crowd-sourcing, and social 
auditing. This brief deals specifically with 
open budgeting.
What is open budgeting?
‘Open budgeting’ refers to public access to 
budgetary information and processes related 
to education, with the opportunity for citizens 
to participate in the budgetary cycle. It builds on 
the first experience of participatory budgeting, 
piloted in 1989 by the Brazilian city of Porto 
Alegre. Three levels of citizen involvement can 
be distinguished here: (i) access by citizens 
to transparent information related to budget 
allocation and spending; (ii) consultation with 
citizens on budgetary decisions, particularly 
on the prioritization of resource allocation; and 
(iii) active engagement of citizens in all the 
decisions made in the budgetary cycle, from the 
allocation of resources, to their use and control –  
what is often also called ‘participatory budgeting’.Open budgeting can take place at all 
administrative levels of the education system, 
from the central level down to the district 
and school levels. During the last decade, a 
number of initiatives have been carried out, 
especially at municipal and school levels. Open Budgeting
An illustrative form of open government  
in education
© Shutterstock
Useful resources
The International Budget Partnership 
(IBP) has published seven editions of the 
Open Budget Survey ; the 2019 report 
provides information on budget disclosure, 
opportunities for public engagement, and 
checks and balances in the budget process 
from 117 countries.
The Participatory Budgeting Project 
(PBP) has developed a guide  dealing with 
participatory budgeting in schools, as well 
as videos, an online course for educators, 
and other tools.
With the support of the European 
Commission, PlaNET Social ENTERprise  
has developed a manual to include 
students in school participatory budgeting, 
building on real-world examples from 
Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and Slovenia.Underlying this approach is the idea that by 
promoting dialogue among administrative 
staff, teachers, parents, and students, and by 
giving them a say in financial decisions, open 
budgeting can encourage a more efficient and 
informed management of resources focused 
on community needs. It is also expected to 
lead to greater ‘public acceptance of inevitable 
trade-offs’ (Pekkonen and Malena, n.d.).
‘Open budgeting’ refers to public 
access to budgetary information 
and processes related to education, 
with the opportunity for citizens to 
participate in the budgetary cycle.
An example of open budgeting
In 2011, four District City Council members 
from New York City launched the 
Participatory Budgeting New York City 
(PBNYC) project together with about 40 
community-based organizations. Using 
District discretionary funds, they aimed to 
introduce physical improvements in public 
sites such as schools, libraries, parks, and 
public housing. By 2018, US$206  million 
had been allocated to 706 projects through 
PBNYC. Education has received the greatest 
share, funding school renovations, sanitation 
improvements, and technological upgrades. 
Eligible projects cannot exceed US$35,000, 
must ensure at least five years of ‘useful life’, 
and be submitted by community members 
to ‘Budget Delegates’. These delegates are 
responsible for turning ideas into fully-
fledged proposals at District level while 
also incorporating feedback from city 
agencies. Proposals are then submitted 
to community-wide voting. With the help 
of neighbourhood associations, special 
efforts are made to engage people from all 
backgrounds, particularly people of colour, 
women, disadvantaged citizens, non-English 
speakers, non-citizens, and those who 
have never before voted in this process. In 
addition, schools located in participating 
districts receive US$2,000 as part of the 
Civics for All initiative, to fund proposals 
documented and supported by students, 
aimed at improving the quality of school life. Open budgeting implementation framework
The number and nature of activities involved 
in the implementation of open budgeting 
processes depend on the level of citizen 
engagement (see also Figure 1 ). 
 —Level 1: Information platforms are put in 
place by government authorities to share 
information with citizens about the national 
education budget, district/school budgets, 
and/or school budget transfers. For 
example, in 2012 the government of Ghana 
decided to open up parliamentary education 
committees to citizens, while between 
1995 and 2000 the government of Uganda 
decided to publish information about 
school budget transfers using national 
newspapers, local radio stations, and school 
boards, as part of its information campaign.
 —Level 2: Opportunities for citizens to 
participate in budgetary discussions are 
initiated at national, local, or school level. 
Such discussions usually mainly involve 
citizen representatives, who sit in official 
deliberative structures, e.g. the Parliament 
at national level, local assemblies at district 
or municipal levels, and school management 
committees (SMCs) at school level. In some 
cases a larger group of people can also be 
brought in, especially at school level –  in 
particular teachers, parents, and students 
–  to discuss budget prioritization and the 
monitoring of how funds are being used.
 —Level 3: Citizens are invited, most often by 
municipal or city authorities, to suggest 
ideas for improvements to school life; they 
are encouraged to brainstorm collectively 
and to submit their ideas. Intermediaries, IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°2 / 2021
© Shutterstockcommunity associations, are brought in to 
help them frame fully-fledged proposals, 
including a budget and schedule, after 
checking the technical aspects with the 
relevant public agencies. Proposals are then 
submitted to the citizen vote, and those 
selected are granted funding. The PBNYC 
project is a good example of this type of 
citizen participation in open budgeting. 
Open budgeting requires some flexibility from 
government authorities if they are to adapt 
their priorities to the needs expressed by 
the education community as a whole. It also 
requires a dedicated budget, set aside for the
sole purpose of ensuring that sufficient 
information and time have been made available 
for participation, and to fund any citizen 
proposals that may arise.
Involving young people in the open 
budgeting process
A wide variety of participatory budgeting (PB) 
projects involving young people have been 
developed at school level for now more than a 
decade. As illustrated by the three examples 
provided opposite, the impetus can be provided 
by a ministry of education, regional/municipal  
authorities, or civil society organizations. In 
central and eastern Europe especially, civilIIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°2 / 2021
Figure 1. Open budgeting levels 
Source : Author
Participatory Budgeting in Portugal
In 2016, the Portuguese Ministry of Education 
launched the School Participatory Budgeting 
initiative in all lower and upper secondary public 
schools. It provided €1 per student (with a minimum 
of €500 per school), to encourage students to 
participate in democratic processes and learn 
citizenship skills. Their proposals are submitted to 
a vote, and winning proposals are funded.
For more details, see: https://opescolas.pt/
Participatory Budgeting in France
Since January 2005, the French region of Poitou-
Charentes (now a part of Nouvelle-Aquitaine) has 
devoted €10 million per year to PB in public and 
private secondary schools. A kick off meeting is 
organized in each school for students, parents 
and school staff. Projects are discussed in small 
groups, and presented to the school assembly. 
Regional authorities review their technical 
feasibility and budget. The first three projects 
voted for by the school assembly are funded.
Source: Participedia Case Sudy, Poitou-CharentesPublication of budgetary 
informationBudget set aside for  
citizen projects
Vote, then selection of 
winning projectsFormulation of proposals 
and validation by expertsSubmission of ideas to 
improve school lifeBrainstorming of ideas 
framed in a protocolDiscussion of public budget 
priorities with citizens 
Adaptation of budget 
priorities accordinglyLevel 1  
Transparent budgetingLevel 2  
Open budgeting discussionLevel 3  
Participatory budgetingl 
society has been quite active in experimenting 
with PB projects at school level, including in 
Lithuania, Poland, Slovenia, Slovakia, and Ukraine. 
These projects serve to develop students’ skills 
in such areas as civics, project formulation, 
financial management, and public speaking.
Open budgeting can help fight corruption
Corruption risks exist at each of the steps 
involved in the budgetary cycle. These include, for example, the allocation of funds based on 
inflated enrolment figures; embezzlement of 
funds during their transfer from the central 
to the local or school level; and inappropriate 
payments made with these funds. By submitting 
all budgetary processes to public scrutiny, and 
shedding light on possible clientelism and other 
malpractice, it is expected that open government 
practices such as open budgeting will help reduce 
these risks and encourage public authorities 
to become more responsive and accountable.
More generally, open budgeting can help 
foster budget literacy among the population, 
starting with the younger generation. The 
gradual imparting of the knowledge and skills 
necessary for understanding the budgetary 
cycle and process, analysing and advocating 
for it, and carrying out budget tracking and 
monitoring, can help build an environment 
more conducive to budget integrity. Moreover, 
it can sustain local democracy by giving 
citizens a voice during deliberations which aim 
to channel resources and allocate funds in the 
best interests of all.IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°2 / 2021
Contact information 
This brief was written by Muriel 
Poisson, IIEP Programme Specialist 
and Coordinator of the Institute’s 
research project on ‘Open government 
in education: Learning from 
experience’. It has benefitted from an 
initial document search carried out by 
Sanskruti Gholsakar, Consultant. 
For further information, contact:  
Muriel Poisson 
m.poisson@iiep.unesco.org
IIEP-UNESCO
7-9 rue Eugène Delacroix
75016 Paris, France
Tel: +33 1 45 03 77 00
Fax: +33 1 40 72 83 66
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.orgReferences
Ben Hammo, M.  n.d. High School 
Participatory Budget (Poitou-Charentes, 
France), Participedia, https://participedia.
net/case/24
Duncikaite, I.  2019. Participatory budgeting 
initiatives lead to greater transparency: 
Example of two Lithuanian schools,  
https://etico.iiep.unesco.org/en/
participatory-budgeting-initiatives-lead-
greater-transparency-example-two-
lithuanian-schools
New York City, NY Department of 
Education. 2019. Civics for All. Participatory 
Budgeting in Your School . Training materials 
2019, https://infohub.nyced.org/docs/
default-source/default-document-library/
participatory-budgeting-in-your-school.pd f
Pekkonen, A.; Malena, C. n.d. Budget 
Transparency. Civicus, https://www.
civicus.org/documents/toolkits/PGX_G_
Budget%20Transparency.pdf.Further reading
Gover, J. Forthcoming. Open Budget: 
Learning from the Experience of 
Participatory Budgeting in the US . Paris: 
IIEP-UNESCO. 
Huss, O.; Keudel, O. 2020.  Open Government 
in Education: Clarifying Concepts and 
Mapping Initiatives. Series: Ethics and 
Corruption in Education. Paris: IIEP-
UNESCO, https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000373142.locale=en .
Peixoto, P . Forthcoming. Budget ouvert : Le 
budget participatif des écoles au Portugal. 
Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. 
To learn more about IIEP’s research in the 
area, consult the ETICO online platform  
devoted to ethics and corruption in 
education. You can also contact us by e-mail 
at: etico@iiep.unesco.org . 
Also in this series of briefs: Poisson, M. 202I. 
Open Government/Open Contracting/Open 
Policy-Making/Social Auditing: Illustrative 
Forms of Open Government in Education. 
Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this review do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of 
UNESCO or IIEP concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries. 
© UNESCO 2021 — This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access 
Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). The present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication.Participatory Budgeting in Lithuania
With the support of Transparency International 
Lithuania, PB was implemented in two schools in 
Vilnius in 2019. Initially, students submitted more 
than 100 ideas. They then prepared proposals which 
they presented to the whole school community for 
a vote. A budget of €1,000 to €1,500 per school was 
allocated to these projects. Four out of five students 
expressed their satisfaction with the experience.
Source: Duncikaite, 2019. 