IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°3 / 2021
As part of its research project on ‘Open 
government (OG) in education: Learning 
from experience’, the UNESCO International 
Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP) has 
prepared five thematic briefs illustrating 
various forms of OG as applied to the education 
field: open government, open budgeting, open 
contracting, open policy-making and crowd-
sourcing, and social auditing. This brief deals 
specifically with open contracting.
What is open contracting?
‘Open contracting’ refers to the full disclosure 
of information on public contracts throughout 
the procurement chain, with citizen 
participation at every step in the process, from 
the issuance of tenders to the monitoring and 
evaluation of contract implementation. There 
are three critical steps: (i) public disclosure 
of information related to the identification 
of needs, the planning of the tendering, 
and the specification of selection criteria; 
(ii) provision of access to the documentation 
related to the procurement process, from the 
invitation to tender to the award of a contract, 
with the option for stakeholders to provide 
comments and express concerns along 
the way; and (iii) holding public authorities  
accountable for  the quantity and quality 
of goods or services delivered as a result.Open contracting can be used in a variety 
of domains within the education sector 
where public procurement is required, 
particularly in school construction and 
renovation, and purchase of school 
equipment, school meals, and textbooks. 
By engaging the general public in the 
process, open government practices like Open Contracting
An illustrative form of open government  
in education
© Shutterstock
Useful resources
The OECD has published a report  
highlighting the main integrity risks existing 
throughout the public procurement cycle, 
and key means for addressing them. These 
include adequate and timely information 
about upcoming contracts and ongoing 
procurement processes; open and regular 
dialogue with suppliers as well as end users; 
and e-procurement.
The Open Contracting Partnership has 
developed a wealth of resources  on open 
contracting, including global principles, 
red flags, self-learning materials, and 
Open Contracting Data Standard  (OCDS) 
tools to facilitate access to data:.Hivos has 
produced an advocacy toolkit for opening 
up contracting, which emphasizes the 
importance of people-centred and evidence-
based advocacy in public contracting 
processes, at national and local levels.open contracting offer multiple advantages: 
they can help ensure that the need for a 
new tender is real, that the specifications 
set are clear, that the whole procurement 
process is transparent, that the final goods 
or services delivered fulfil the quantitative 
and qualitative requirements set, and that 
these are in tune with citizens’ needs.
‘Open contracting’ refers to the 
disclosure of information on public 
contracts throughout the entire 
procurement chain, with citizen 
participation at every step.
An example of open contracting
In 2015, the Colombian Ministry of Education, 
together with the Colombian national public 
procurement agency CCE (Colombia Compra 
Eficiente), started to examine the contracting 
procedures used as part of the School 
Meals Programme (SMP), one of the largest 
social programmes in the country. With a 
view to increasing the range of bidders, 
cutting out intermediaries, regulating food 
prices, and reducing anti-competitive 
practices, they decided to open up the 
SMP contracting process on a pilot basis. 
Following an agreement signed with the 
Department of Education in the Capital 
District of Bogotá, all the documents related 
to SMP procurement in Bogotá became visible 
to all stakeholders via the national SECOP  
e-procurement platform. At the same time, 
school meal committees were created to 
monitor the quality of the food provided, and 
to suggest ways for improving the SMP. As 
a result, the number of bids from suppliers 
quadrupled, prices decreased (with savings 
estimated at 10-15 per cent), and the quality 
of meals improved thanks to the intensive 
monitoring established along the entire chain, 
from production plants to end beneficiaries.
Open contracting implementation framework
The implementation of open contracting requires 
the involvement of stakeholders in the three 
main steps of the process, as summarized below 
and illustrated in Figure 1 . —Step 1: Information about tendering, along 
with supporting documents, is shared with 
the general public. These might include a 
rationale for the project, basic information 
about the cost and budget, technical 
papers and feasibility studies, notice of 
planned procurement, procurement method, 
contracts awarded, names of contractors, 
contract updates, performance indicators, 
and appeals and decisions on procurement 
challenges and debarred contractors 
(Centre for Global Development, 2014). Such 
information needs to be centralized on a 
dedicated, national online platform, such as 
the SECOP in Colombia.
 —Step 2 : Various stakeholders are offered the 
opportunity to provide feedback and raise 
concerns at several stages of the procurement 
process. This might take the form of integrity 
pacts, like the 2003 initiative on textbooks 
implemented by the Argentinean Ministry of 
Education and the NGO Poder Ciudadano. In 
this case, both companies and civil society 
organizations were consulted at the pre-
bidding stage to discuss criteria for textbook 
selection, as well as bidding procedures.
 —Step 3 : Public participation is sought, to 
monitor the execution, completion, and 
performance of the service provided. What 
is often referred to as civic monitoring 
of contract implementation consists in 
mobilizing civil society groups, end users, 
and/or young people to document contract 
implementation, report possible irregularities 
(such as low-quality products or late delivery), 
and suggest improvements accordingly. The 
CheckMySchool project in the Philippines 
is an example of citizen involvement in the 
 —
IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°3 / 2021
© Duque Boteromonitoring of school textbook delivery, along
with the monitoring of test results, enrolment, 
and other education information of interest 
(Parafina, 2018).
Open contracting can be implemented 
at all administrative levels. However, as 
contracting procedures are often carried out 
at the national level, some type of versatile 
online platform is required for gathering all 
contracting data in one place and making it 
available. Beyond information platforms, the 
digitalization of each step of the procurement 
chain (i.e. e-procurement) can greatly facilitate 
consultation, feedback, and monitoring 
processes. This requires considerable 
investment in time, expertise, and technology 
by government authorities.
Involving young people in open contracting
In recent years, numerous experiments around 
the world have involved students in open 
contracting (OC). Several of these experiments 
deal specifically with school construction, as 
illustrated by the three examples provided 
opposite from Finland, Italy, and Paraguay. 
In the first case, the initiative has come from 
the Finnish National Agency for Education 
(EDUFI), which intends to better adapt 
the design of new schools to pedagogical 
requirements as well as to users’ needs 
(students, teachers, and other school staff).IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°3 / 2021
Figure 1. Open contracting implementation steps
Source : AuthorOpen Contracting in Finland
Finland has recently introduced participatory 
approaches to school construction, in large and 
small municipalities alike. In the State-run Finnish-
Russian School, for instance, the Finnish National 
Agency for Education (EDUFI) has organized 
dozens of workshops with school actors (including 
students), together with benchmark visits to other new 
schools. A designer and a pedagogical expert 
were responsible for facilitating the translation 
of users’ needs during the whole design and 
construction process.
For more details, see: Duthilleul et al., 2018.
Open Contracting in Italy
AMAPOLA is part of a joint EU/Transparency 
International project aimed at improving transparency 
in public procurement through the use of integrity 
pacts. The project provides support to technical 
high school students from the Sicilian region of 
the Madonie, thus enabling them to carry out civic 
monitoring activities. It trains them in how to do online 
research, inspect construction sites, and conduct 
interviews with Construction Agency officers. This 
gives them hands-on experience in working on 
public procurement launched by a local municipality.
For more details, see Madonie Resilienti Laboratorio 
di Futuro.
Publication of tendering 
information and other 
supporting documentsMonitoring of service 
delivery (desk review, site 
visits, interviews)
Raising complaintsSubmission of ideas for 
improvement Identification of 
irregularities (quality, 
quantity, timeliness)Consultation with 
stakeholders at various 
stages of the process 
(integrity pacts)Step 1  
Publication of  
tendering informationStep 2  
Participation in  
procurement proceduresStep 3  
Civic monitoring of  
contract implementationIn the two other cases, NGOs are in charge of 
helping students to carry out civic monitoring 
activities focused on ongoing public 
procurement cases.Open contracting can help fight corruption
Public contracting is often presented as the 
first source of, and opportunity for, corruption 
and fraud in government. The corruption 
risks are multiple and well documented in the
literature. They include: the falsification 
of needs so as to channel benefits to an 
individual or organization; so-called invitation 
tenders that are not publicized; collusion 
of bidders to inflate prices; favouritism or 
payment of bribes in the selection process; 
and cheating on the quantity or quality of 
services, materials, and equipment provided 
(Hallak and Poisson, 2007). In this context, 
therefore, it is expected that by increasing 
capacity to monitor contract bidding and 
implementation, open contracting can help 
identify red flags and anomalies, question 
the appropriateness of the decisions taken, 
and reveal deficiencies in contract execution 
caused by corruption practices. IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°3 / 2021
Contact information 
This brief was written by Muriel 
Poisson, IIEP Programme Specialist 
and Coordinator of the Institute’s 
research project on ‘Open government 
in education: Learning from 
experience’. It has benefitted from an 
initial document search carried out by 
Sanskruti Gholsakar, Consultant. 
For further information, contact:  
Muriel Poisson 
m.poisson@iiep.unesco.org
IIEP-UNESCO
7-9 rue Eugène Delacroix
75016 Paris, France
Tel: +33 1 45 03 77 00
Fax: +33 1 40 72 83 66
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.orgReferences
Brown, S.; Neumann, G. 2017 . Paraguay’s 
transparency alchemists. Open contracting 
stories. 2 October 2017 , https://medium.
com/open-contracting-stories/paraguays-
transparency-alchemists-623c8e3c538f
Center for Global Development. 2014. 
Publishing Government Contracts: 
Addressing Concerns and Easing 
Implementation.  Washington, DC: Center for 
Global Development, https://www.cgdev.
org/publication/ft/publishing-government-
contracts-addressing-concerns-and-
easing-implementation
Duthilleul, Y.; Blyth, A.; Imms, W.; 
Maslauskaite, K. 2018. Design and Learning 
Environments in the City of Espoo, Finland . 
Thematic Reviews Series. Paris: Council of 
Europe Development Bank. https://coebank.
org/media/documents/School_Design_and_
Learning_Environments_in_the_City_of_
Espoo_Finland.pdf
Hallak, J.; Poisson, M.  2007. Corrupt 
Schools, Corrupt Universities: What Can 
Be Done? Paris: UNESCO Press, https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000150259.Further reading
Duque Botero, J. D. 2021.  Open Contracting: 
The School Meals Programme in Bogotá, 
Colombia . Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Bogotá: 
Duque Botero Consultores, https://etico.
iiep.unesco.org/sites/default/files/
open_contracting_the_school_meals_
programme_in_bogota_columbia_en.pdf
Parafina, R. 2018. Philippines: Using open 
school data to improve transparency 
and accountability. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO, 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000265938 .
To learn more about IIEP’s research in the 
area, consult the ETICO online platform  
devoted to ethics and corruption in 
education. You can also contact us by e-mail 
at: etico@iiep.unesco.org .
Also in this series of briefs: Poisson, M. 202I. 
Open Government/Open Budgeting/Open 
Policy-Making/Social Auditing: Illustrative 
Forms of Open Government in Education. 
Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this review do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of 
UNESCO or IIEP concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries. 
© UNESCO 2021 — This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access 
Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). The present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication.Open Contracting in Paraguay
In 2015, in the city of Ciudad del Este, a student 
movement called reAcción decided to monitor 
school infrastructure. High school students 
conducted site visits, interviewed school 
principals, and took photos of facilities; university 
students looked for related data on government 
portals. They also organized advocacy and 
training activities for the whole school community 
in this domain. As a result, the national Public 
Procurement Agency agreed to facilitate access 
to information on school contracting through 
government portals.
Source: Brown and Neumann, 2017 .