IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°4 / 2021
As part of its research project on ‘Open 
government (OG) in education: Learning 
from experience’, the UNESCO International 
Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP) has 
prepared five thematic briefs illustrating 
various forms of OG as applied to the education 
field: open government, open budgeting, open 
contracting, open policy-making and crowd-
sourcing, and social auditing. This brief deals 
specifically with open policy-making and 
crowd-sourcing. 
What is open policy-making?
‘Open policy-making’ refers to the use of 
collaborative approaches to inform and develop 
policies that meet the dynamic needs of citizens. 
The goal here is threefold: (i) to build on collective 
intelligence for problem-solving, drawing on 
various sources of expertise, including that of 
end users who can enrich the process using 
their lived experience of the issues discussed; 
(ii) to make the decision-making process more 
inclusive by tapping the inputs provided by 
people outside the traditional boundaries of 
administrative institutions and authorities; 
and (iii) to promote ownership of the policies 
adopted by seeking contributions from a larger 
and broader group of people in order to gain 
greater acceptance and feasibility, and possibly 
also smoother implementation.Open policy-making can occur at different 
stages of the policy cycle, from problem 
identification to policy formulation, drafting, 
revision, implementation, monitoring, and 
evaluation. It can take place at the national 
level (for instance when a new education law or 
reform is in preparation), or at the local/school 
level when education policies or projects that 
are more limited in scope are being debated. From Open Policy-Making to Crowd-Sourcing  
Illustrative forms of open government  
in education
© Transparency International Bangladesh
Useful resources
The Government of the United Kingdom 
has published a manual dealing with open 
policy-making which also provides tools and 
techniques for creating more open and user-
led policy.
The Governance Lab at New York University 
has formulated eight recommendations  for 
open and engaged policy-making, looking at 
four basic stages: understanding the prob -
lem, developing solutions, drafting, and eval -
uation and assessment.
In recent years, a number of private 
companies, mostly North American and 
European (such as citizenlab, Civocracy, 
Decidim, Dyntra, and Emergreen, to mention 
a few), have developed digital citizen 
participation tools and platforms at the 
request of municipal authorities  for cities 
such as Barcelona, Gent, and Vancouver.Local-level approaches are particularly 
important in ensuring that the perspectives and 
needs of underprivileged groups are duly taken 
into account. Simply by bringing in new actors, 
open policy-making can expand the range of 
possible solutions, thanks to diversified and 
renewed sources of information, viewpoints, 
and approaches.
‘Open policy-making’ refers to the 
use of collaborative approaches to 
inform and develop policies that 
meet the dynamic needs of citizens.
What is crowd-sourcing?
During recent years, new technologies have 
encouraged the development of crowd-sourcing 
approaches within the education sector. 
Although they remain largely marginal, they 
are useful for fostering collective intelligence 
by selecting ‘functions which until present have 
been performed by employees, and transferring 
them, in the form of an open online call, to 
an ‘undefined virtual community’ (Lenart-
Gansiniec, 2017). Such functions can cover 
financial resources (‘crowd-funding’), curricula 
(‘open education’), ideas (‘open innovations’), 
expertise, and so on. More particularly, 
crowd-sourcing can help to better analyse 
and understand complex issues, encourage 
creativity, collect new ideas, design new 
methodologies or tools, and obtain feedback 
on alternative solutions. Online platforms and 
consultation tools open up new opportunities 
for public authorities to use crowd-sourcing.
Examples of open policy-making and 
crowd-sourcing
With a view to creating spaces for reflection 
and consultation, the Government of Mada-
gascar has established ‘Local Consultation 
Structures’ (SLCs) in all the country’s 
municipalities. SLC members include, for 
example, officials from decentralized 
administrations, traditional leaders, members 
of local political parties and organizations, 
representatives from associations of women, 
young people, vulnerable groups, and economic 
actors. With the support of the NGO SAHA, the 
results of citizen participatory surveys aimed at assessing the performance of the health, 
education, and land sectors were submitted 
to 46 SLCs for debate in spring 2020. Those 
exchanges led to the setting of priorities during 
the development of annual municipal plans and 
budgets. Requests from citizens to improve 
the functioning of educational services were 
taken into account on the same occasion 
(Ravelomanantsoa and Andrianarivelo, 2021).
‘Crowd-sourcing’ refers to the practice 
of consulting citizens, drawing on their 
expertise to collectively find solutions 
to the complex problems faced by 
public authorities.
In 2015, the Raymond A. Mason School of 
Business at the College of William & Mary 
in Virginia, USA, launched a crowd-sourcing 
platform aimed at seeking ideas to revamp 
the School’s MBA programme. The School’s
administration set up a contest, establishing 
clear parameters for idea submissions and 
providing an easy-to-use social media platform. 
The contest challenged former and current 
students, the business community, and human 
resources specialists to brainstorm ideas for 
new subjects and skills, and an overall strategy 
for the next MBA programme. Discussions 
were open to anyone and included various 
categories to guide inputs, such as courses 
and skills; scholarships and financing; 
lifelong learning and community; and 
marketing. At the end of a seven-week period, 
a jury of CEOs and top executives selected 
the best among the 200+ ideas submitted. 
Some of these formed the foundation 
of the School’s 2016 MBA programme.IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°4 / 2021
© ShutterstockOpen policy-making implementation 
framework
Opening up specific stages of the policy-
making process, including analysis of problems, 
crafting of solutions, and commenting on a draft 
policy or project document, requires sufficient 
time and resources. The major steps involved 
are summarized below and illustrated in Figure 1 .
 —Smooth and efficient open policy-making 
(OP) requires that the objectives for the 
consultation process are clearly set from its 
inception, based on transparent information 
and communication; the major issues 
submitted for discussion should also be 
clearly delineated.
 —Public authorities then have to decide 
whether they want to open the consultation 
process to any person interested in 
participating, or to restrict it to a limited 
number of people (e.g. a representative 
citizens’ panel). In this case, selection criteria 
should be clearly specified as they will 
condition the legitimacy of the inputs made. —Various communication platforms should be 
envisaged for collecting inputs: traditional 
ones, in order to limit the effects of the 
digital divide; more high-tech ones, such 
as annotation platforms to draft policy or 
project documents collectively; and crowd-
sourcing platforms that enable a more rapid 
clustering and analysis of responses through 
artificial intelligence.
 —One critical responsibility for public 
authorities is to ensure that their conclusions 
reflect the diversity of the opinions 
expressed, while at the same time reaching 
consensus: when some people’s opinions are 
ignored, this can lead to frustration, tension, 
or even conflict.
 —Public authorities have the obligation to 
inform participants about how they have used 
the feedback received, and how the final 
decisions were taken. Finally, all participants 
should receive a guarantee of confidentiality 
for their inputs and be assured that their 
privacy will be protected.IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°4 / 2021
Figure 1. Open policy-making (OP) implementation steps
Source : Author.Issues to be 
discussedAnnotation 
platformsEstablished 
groupsStep 1  
OP frameworkStep 2  
Selection of 
participantsStep 3  
Communication 
platforms
Info and 
communicationCrowd-sourcing 
platformsCitizen panelsTaking final 
decisions Feedback on 
arbitrationsStep 5  
Public  
reportingStep 4  
Looking for 
consensus
Setting 
objectivesPublic forums Open to allInvolving young people in open 
policy-making
Youth councils and parliaments have been 
structured at international (e.g. UN), regional 
(e.g. European Union), national (e.g. Canada), and 
municipal (e.g. Barcelona) levels. The government 
of the State of Alberta, Canada, for instance, has 
established the Minister’s Youth Council, a platform 
for students to share inputs and perspectives on 
provincial programmes and initiatives on a number 
of education topics. It is composed of 41 junior and 
senior high school students (secondary level) with 
diverse interests, identities, and backgrounds 
from all regions of Alberta. They are selected for a
10-month period that coincides with the academic 
year, and are expected to attend three meetings 
over this period. They engage with teachers, school 
leaders, and other educational stakeholders on a 
diverse range of issues related to learning.
Open policy-making can help fight 
corruption
When engaging in open policy-making, public au-
thorities accept the principle that citizens should 
be informed and should be able to influence the decisions made on their behalf. As a result, the 
opacity surrounding many government delib -
erations and decisions will tend to diminish. By 
limiting the discretionary powers of public admin-
istration officials and redefining policy-making as 
a co-creation process for the common good, an 
environment is created that fosters more integrity, 
good behaviour, and responsive practices. IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°4 / 2021
Contact information 
This brief was written by Muriel 
Poisson, IIEP Programme Specialist 
and Coordinator of the Institute’s 
research project on ‘Open government 
in education: Learning from 
experience’. It has benefitted from an 
initial document search carried out by 
Sanskruti Gholsakar, Consultant. 
For further information, contact:  
Muriel Poisson 
m.poisson@iiep.unesco.org
IIEP-UNESCO
7-9 rue Eugène Delacroix
75016 Paris, France
Tel: +33 1 45 03 77 00
Fax: +33 1 40 72 83 66
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.orgReferences
Lenart-Gansiniec, R. 2017 . ‘Factors 
influencing decisions about crowdsourcing 
in the public sector: A literature review’. 
In: Acta Universitatis Agriculturae et 
Silviculturae Mendelianae Brunensis,  
65(6), 1997–2005.
Ravelomanantsoa, H.; Andrianarivelo, R. 
2021. Politique ouverte: structures locales 
de concertation dans les municipalités de 
Sahanivotry et Masindray, Madagascar. Paris: 
IIEP-UNESCO, Antananarivo: SAHA, https://
etico.iiep.unesco.org/en/politique-ouverte-
structures-locales-de-concertation-dans-
les-municipalites-de-sahanivotry-et.Further reading
Huss, O.; Keudel, O. 2020.  Open Government 
in Education: Clarifying Concepts and 
Mapping Initiatives. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO, 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000373142.locale=en .
To learn more about IIEP’s research in the 
area, consult the ETICO online platform  
devoted to ethics and corruption in 
education. You can also contact us by e-mail 
at: etico@iiep.unesco.org .
Also in this series of briefs: Poisson, M. 
202I. Open Government/Open Budgeting/
Open Contracting/Social Auditing: Illustrative 
Forms of Open Government in Education. 
Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this review do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of 
UNESCO or IIEP concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries. 
© UNESCO 2021 — This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access 
Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). The present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication.
Youth Parliament in Brussels© Shutterstock