IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°1 / 2021
As part of its research project on ‘Open 
government (OG) in education: Learning 
from experience’, the UNESCO International 
Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP) has 
prepared five thematic briefs illustrating 
various forms of OG as applied to the  education 
field: open government, open budgeting, 
open contracting, open policy-making and 
crowd-sourcing, and social auditing. This 
brief explains the overall concept of open 
government.
What is open government (OG)?
Within the education sector, ‘open government’ 
refers to opening up government data, decision-
making, processes, and control mechanisms to 
public involvement and scrutiny, with a view 
to ensuring inclusive and equitable quality 
education. The term entered public debate in 
the United States after the Second World War, 
due to increased demand for citizen oversight 
of government activities. Later on, freedom of 
(or right to) information acts became a template 
for legislation in a growing number of countries, 
including the USA (1966), France (1978), 
Australia (1982), and Colombia (1985). More 
recently, calls for renewed government–citizen 
interaction, combined with the development of 
new technologies, have led some governments 
to explore innovative ways not only to share 
information but also to actively consult and 
engage citizens in education service delivery. Initiatives to introduce open government can 
be carried out at all levels of the education 
sector, from the central to the municipal 
and school levels. At the moment, however, 
they tend to focus on the local rather than 
the national level. A local initiative ‘is deeply 
specific and contextual, and touches directly 
on lived experiences’ (Lipovsek, 2016), and 
mainly targets school-level stakeholders 
such as pupils, parents, teachers, principals, 
members of school management committees, 
and community members. Civil society Open Government in Education
A conceptual framework
© Shutterstock
Useful resources
The Open Government Declaration adopted 
in September 2011 states that signing 
countries must ‘foster a global culture 
of open government that empowers and 
delivers for citizens, and advances the 
ideals of open and participatory 21st 
century government’; it has been endorsed 
by 78 countries so far.
The OECD has produced an evidence-based 
analysis  of open government initiatives 
carried out around the world; it reviews the 
challenges countries face in implementing 
and co-ordinating them.
The World Bank has mapped out the 
general landscape of research focused on 
the outcomes and impact associated with 
open government reforms and interventions.organizations are often used as intermediaries 
to facilitate the implementation of OG 
initiatives. Open government can reach 
various levels of maturity; Lee and Kwak (2012) 
distinguish four of these, usually beginning 
with data transparency and proceeding to 
open participation, open collaboration, and, 
finally, ubiquitous engagement. 
‘Open government’ refers to the 
opening up within the education 
sector of government data, 
decision-making, processes, and 
control mechanisms to public 
involvement and scrutiny, with a view 
to ensuring inclusive and equitable 
quality education.
OG guiding principles
Three main principles underlie the concept 
of open government: (i) transparency, 
which can be defined as ‘the extent to 
which governments make available the 
data and the documents the public needs 
in order to assess government action and 
exercise voice in decision making’ (Harrison 
et  al., 2012); (ii) citizen engagement, which 
consists of encouraging the participation 
and collaboration of the general public 
when planning, implementing, monitoring, 
or evaluating a new policy or project; and 
(iii) accountability, meaning government 
authorities’ obligation to be responsive to 
citizens’ needs, requests, and possibly also 
complaints. These are shown in Figure 1 .
OGP National Action Plans 
As part of the multilateral Open Government 
Partnership  (OGP) initiative launched in 2011, participating countries submit National Action 
Plans (NAPs) co-created by governments 
and civil society. NAPs outline how their 
commitments to enhancing transparency, 
public participation in government, and 
accountability might be realized. In 2019, 49 
of these countries and local entities were 
engaged in co-creating new plans, while 
50 were implementing recently developed 
plans. The review of OGP commitments by 
participating countries led to the identification 
of 295 education-related commitments 
by 60 countries, formulated between 2011 
and 2019. The major topics being tackled 
within this framework are e-government and 
education service delivery; open educational 
resources, open science, open source, and 
open standards; and citizenship and anti-
corruption education.
Mapping of OG initiatives in the 
education sector
The education policy or project planning cycle 
includes the following stages: diagnosis, 
policy formulation, resource allocation, 
policy implementation and monitoring, and 
reporting and evaluation. Each of the steps in 
this cycle allows for varying degrees of citizen 
participation and inputs. These can apply to 
any or all of the following four major areas:
 —Open data: the sharing of educational 
information with the general public, in 
either paper or electronic format (Poisson, 
2021). This covers the publishing of open 
school data, i.e. primary data disaggregated 
at school level, including such items 
as school budgets, student enrolment, 
teacher numbers and qualifications, 
condition of school facilities, availability of 
textbooks, and student test results.IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°1 / 2021
Figure 1. Open government: three underlying principles
Source : Author.Citizen engagement Accountability TransparencyOpen government —Open policy: the use of collaborative 
approaches to inform and develop 
educational policy-making and projects 
that meet the dynamic needs of citizens. For 
example, new crowd-sourcing platforms 
have been developed in recent years, 
making it possible to use online consultation 
to collectively find solutions to the complex 
problems faced by education authorities.
 —Open processes: these include open 
budgeting, open contracting, and open 
education in particular. They affect public 
access to budgetary, contracting, and 
curriculum design information and processes 
related to education, with the opportunity 
for citizens to participate in the budget, 
contracting, and curriculum design cycle.
 —Social auditing: the monitoring of an 
educational project or policy by its direct 
beneficiaries, with a view to meeting pre-
defined objectives. Different methods 
are used to achieve this, such as public 
hearings, citizen or school report cards, 
and community score-cards.
As shown schematically in Figure  2, open 
data is a unique domain of OG, since it is 
both crucial to the success of the three other 
domains, and also a separate domain of its own. In other words, open policy, open budgeting, 
open contracting, and social auditing cannot 
succeed if they are not sustained by an active 
policy of sharing the relevant information and 
data with the general public. 
An example of open government
In 2016, the ‘Open School Platform ’ was 
launched in Ukraine by an NGO called the 
‘Kherson Regional Charitable Fund Union’, with 
the aim of standardizing financial reporting 
by schools. The platform enables schools to 
publish required information in an open data 
format, and creates an online platform for 
exchanges between school administrators, 
parents, and private donors. The information, 
published and accessible online, relates to the 
school budget, and includes school income 
(from both government and private sources), 
school expenditures, and school needs, as 
well as the names of vendors and providers. 
The Open School Platform allows parents 
to assess school needs, make donations, 
and then track the subsequent reporting 
of expenditures. The Kherson Regional 
Charitable Fund Union collaborates with local 
public authorities (LPAs) to inform school 
actors about the platform’s existence and to 
organize training in how to use it. IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°1 / 2021
Figure 2. Schematic typology of open government, showing the cross-cutting importance of 
open data
Open policy 
Crowd-
sourcingOpen 
innovationsOpen 
contracting Open 
educationSocial 
auditingOpen government
Source : AuthorOpen data 
Open 
processes 
Open  
budgeting Using the same platform, school principals 
can also publicly request funds for specific 
needs from the local department of education, 
before turning to parents for contributions. 
Overall, the Open School Platform encourages 
more transparent communication between 
LPAs and schools (Huss and Keudel, 2021).
Open government can help fight corruption
The three principles of open government listed 
above –  transparency, citizen engagement, 
and accountability – are pivotal to fighting 
corruption in education. Through open school 
data, the public can indeed verify that their 
governments are spending money fairly, 
and in a way that maximizes educational 
opportunities for marginalized populations. 
Open policy promotes the involvement of 
minorities in the formulation of policy, thereby 
ensuring that policies and curricula are more 
diverse and inclusive. Open procurement 
can increase the level of transparency 
and accountability in education contract management, ensuring that procured items 
(school equipment, textbooks, etc.) actually 
reach their beneficiaries. Another way in which 
open government principles can contribute to 
reducing corrupt practices is through social 
auditing: community monitoring can help 
ensure that school resources are used in the 
correct manner.
Speaking more globally, Sambuli (2016) 
emphasizes that what open government is all 
about is the recalibration of power dynamics 
between the government and citizens. 
In other words, it puts power back in the 
citizens’ hands, on the understanding that 
governing structures will thereby become 
more democratic and empowering, and that 
governing mechanisms will be enhanced 
and made more effective by better aligning 
government activities with the actual needs 
and demands of citizens. At the same time 
public authorities will be encouraged to 
address shortcomings in educational services 
more rapidly and adequately. IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°1 / 2021
Contact information 
This brief was written by Muriel 
Poisson, IIEP Programme Specialist 
and Coordinator of the Institute’s 
research project on ‘Open government 
in education: Learning from 
experience’. It has benefitted from an 
initial literature review carried out by 
Inga Støren, Consultant. 
For further information, contact:  
Muriel Poisson 
m.poisson@iiep.unesco.org
IIEP-UNESCO
7-9 rue Eugène Delacroix
75016 Paris, France
Tel: +33 1 45 03 77 00
Fax: +33 1 40 72 83 66
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.orgReferences
Harrison, T. M. et al. 2012. ‘Open 
government and e-government: Democratic 
challenges from a public value perspective’. 
In: Information Polity, 17 (2), 245–253.
Huss, O.; Keudel, O. 2021. Open budget: 
Learning from the Open School Platform in 
Donetsk oblast, Ukraine. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. 
Bologna: Bologna University Press, https://
etico.iiep.unesco.org/en/resource/open-
budget-learning-open-school-platform-
donetsk-oblast-ukraine .
Lipovsek, V. 2016. ‘Multiple ways to go 
deeper and wider’. In: T . Carothers (ed.), 
Ideas for Future Work on Transparency and 
Accountability. Washington, DC: Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace . 
Lee, G.; Kwak, Y. H. 2012. ‘An open 
government maturity model for social media-
based public engagement’. In: Government 
Information Quarterly, 29 (4), 492–503.
Sambuli, N. 2016. Let’s admit it: Open 
Government is political. Blog published on 
medium.com, https://medium.com/omidyar-
network/lets-admit-it-open-government-is-
political-3de7fa52ccc1.Further reading
Huss, O.; Keudel, O. 2020.  Open Government 
in Education: Clarifying Concepts and 
Mapping Initiatives. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO, 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000373142.locale=en .
Poisson, M.  2021. Open School Data: What 
Planners Need to Know. Paris: UNESCO 
Publishing, https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000376705.locale=en .
To learn more about IIEP’s research in this 
area, consult the ETICO online platform  
devoted to ethics and corruption in 
education. You can also contact us by e-mail 
at: etico@iiep.unesco.org .
Also in this series of briefs: Poisson, M. 202I. 
Open Budgeting/Open Contracting/Open 
Policy-Making/Social Auditing: Illustrative 
Forms of Open Government in Education . 
Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this review do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of 
UNESCO or IIEP concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries.
© UNESCO 2021 — This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access 
Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). The present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication.