IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°5 / 2021
As part of its research project on ‘Open 
government (OG) in education: Learning 
from experience’, the UNESCO International 
Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP) has 
prepared five thematic briefs illustrating 
various forms of OG as applied to the education 
field: open government, open budgeting, 
open contracting, open policy-making and 
crowd-sourcing, and social auditing. This 
brief deals specifically with social auditing.
 
What is social auditing?
‘Social auditing’ refers to the monitoring 
of an educational project or policy over 
time by its direct beneficiaries, with a view 
to meeting the pre-defined objectives of 
the project or policy. This new approach 
to auditing was introduced in countries 
such as India during the late 1990s, as a 
part of right-to-information movements, 
on the principle that people should be able 
to access information of public interest, to 
hold education authorities to account, and 
to be ‘listened to’. Three stages are involved: 
(i) raising citizens’ awareness about their 
rights, and giving them the opportunity to 
indicate whether or not they have received 
what they were entitled to; (ii) allowing 
them to verify whether the project or policy 
under scrutiny has been implemented according to official rules, and whether it has 
achieved its set objectives; and (iii) discussing 
the project or policy’s relevance, efficiency, 
and usefulness for them, with the opportunity 
to suggest possible improvements. Social 
audits can be conducted at critical moments 
in the project or policy cycle, or at the end, as 
a summative evaluation.
Social auditing can take different forms, 
including public hearings, citizen or school 
report cards, and community score cards, 
and will adopt various methodological 
approaches accordingly. These normally 
involve reviewing information provided by Social Auditing  
An illustrative form of open government  
in education
© Shutterstock
Useful resources
UNDP has produced a practical guide  that 
reviews social auditing experiences around 
the world and examines the conditions 
required for their successful design and 
im ple mentation, focusing especially on 
demo cratic governance, transparency, and 
ac count  ability issues:
Care International has developed a field 
guide  identifying seven major steps for 
performing social audits, using examples 
from physical development infrastructure 
projects.public authorities, but also, as appropriate, 
collecting additional data directly from end 
users by drawing on their testimonies and 
experiences following a well-established 
protocol. Designed as a complement or an 
alternative to official oversight mechanisms, 
social auditing is of  ten facilitated by 
civil society or community organizations 
responsible for coordinating citizens’ actions.
‘Social auditing’ refers to the 
monitoring of an educational project 
or policy by its direct beneficiaries, 
with a view to meeting its  
pre-defined objectives.
An example of social auditing 
In India, following the adoption of the Right to 
Information Act in 2005, social audits have 
gradually become a mandatory requirement 
for major government programmes. In the 
education field, social audits gained im port  ance 
after the passage of the Right to Education (RTE) 
Act in 2009. Responsibility for monitoring RTE 
implementation was assigned to the National 
Commission for the Protection of Child Rights, 
which decided to open traditional monitoring 
procedures to communities and rights-holders. 
From 2011 to 2013/14, it piloted social auditing 
in nine Indian states: Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Uttar 
Pradesh, as well as the city of Delhi. Civil society 
organizations were invited to participate and 
facilitate the process. Awareness campaigns, 
data gathering, and exchanges with education 
authorities were organized, using different 
platforms such as education dialogues and 
public hearings (Bhatty, 2021).
Social auditing implementation framework
Although the methodology used for social 
auditing can vary, there are some invariants, 
as shown in these four main steps, illustrated 
in Figure 1.
 —Advocacy and awareness campaigns: A 
wide variety of tools can be employed to 
encourage communities and beneficiaries  —
 —
 —
to recognize the importance of social 
auditing. In the case of India, for instance, 
community meetings, together with street 
theatre, songs, puppetry, and other local 
communication mediums were used. The 
goal here is not only to provide information 
on the social auditing process per se, but 
also to make people understand how social 
auditing can help them find solutions to 
their daily problems, and ensure that their 
right to education is being fulfilled.
 —Data collection and review: This requires 
that all major sources of information 
be audited, including, for example, 
official documentation, project or policy 
related data, and financial reports. Often 
the information thus obtained is then 
compared with data collected directly from 
end users. At this critical juncture certain 
steps should be followed: the issues to 
be documented should be clearly listed; 
those responsible for collecting data at 
school and/or household level should be 
trained with the support of civil society 
organizations; clear survey protocols 
should be designed, such as Rwanda’s 
Community Score Cards, in which various 
dimensions of school management are 
rated by school actors; and gaps should 
be identified and ways to address them 
discussed in a collective way.
 —Organizing feedback and exchange op       ­
por tunities: The dialogue between bene    -
ficiaries and education authorities needs  
to be structured in the form of public 
forums or public hearings. During such IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°5 / 2021
Public hearings in South Africa
The Equal Education and Gauteng Education 
Crisis Coalition in South Africa conducted a social 
audit in 2015 on the school condition of 200,000 
students in schools, representing 10 per cent of 
township schools. It revealed shortcomings in 
the areas of sanitation and infrastructure. The 
audit committees demanded that a costed plan 
for implementing norms and standards for school 
infrastructure be included, and that the exclusion 
of students with disabilities be addressed.sessions, the main outcomes of the data 
collection process are reported in the 
presence of those responsible for the 
project or policy under scrutiny, and 
possible actions to redress shortcomings 
are discussed. Documented complaints, 
but also good practices, can be brought to 
the fore. Experience shows the importance 
of faithful recording of the issues raised 
and the recommendations formulated to 
facilitate proper follow-up.
 —Follow ­up with public authorities: Social 
audits are of interest only if they lead to 
changes in the way the policy or project 
under review is carried out. Constant 
pressure from civil society groups is often 
required to obtain concrete results. Two 
follow-up actions can be useful within 
this framework: first, setting up grievance 
mechanisms enabling individuals to go to 
court if their complaints have not been 
addressed, and second, having education 
authorities share information about the 
issues –  solved or yet to be solved –  including 
through online platforms. Good examples 
are the CheckMySchool platform operating 
in the Philippines, My School in Moldova, 
and Mejora tu Escuela in Mexico.
The issues to be audited range from school 
funds (South Africa, Tanzania), staff and pupil attendance (Mexico), and materials procured, 
to regularity of exams (Guinea), collection of 
parental fees (Bangladesh), and textbooks 
(Philippines). Social auditing does not require 
the use of digital tools; however, they are 
increasingly being introduced at different 
stages of the auditing process, as in Tanzania, 
where a panel of citizens was selected to 
report on the quality of public services, 
including schools, using mobile phones.
Involving young people in social auditing
Examples of the involvement of young people 
in social auditing are quite limited, particularly 
at primary and secondary school level. Young 
people are usually grouped together with 
other categories of stakeholder, and they are 
rarely in charge. One exception is the ‘Youth 
Auditors’ programme launched in Peru at the 
end of 2009 by the Comptroller of the Republic 
(La Contraloría ), for the purpose of promoting 
civic values among the younger generation. 
In 2010, the Ministry of Education joined the 
effort, leading to the production of tools and 
training activities designed specifically for 
young people, so that they are equipped to 
audit public contracting processes and thus 
exercise social control. Under this programme, 
students are given the opportunity to audit 
public procurement procedures led by public 
entities that have a direct impact on the IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°5 / 2021
Figure 1. Social auditing framework implementation
Source : AuthorCommunity 
meetingsTraining of 
facilitators Step 1.  
AdvocacyStep 2.  
Data collection
Theatre, songs,  
other street eventsHousehold/school 
surveys Step 4.  
Follow ­up
Awareness 
campaignsGathering of official 
documentation 
Public hearingsStep 3. Reporting 
and feedback
Policy forums
Grievance 
mechanisms
Online platforms  
for follow-upPressure from civil 
society
Discussion of 
survey results well-being of their community, including 
municipalities, police stations, and schools. By 
the end of 2016, more than 327,000 students 
and 3,100 teachers from 20 regions had been 
involved in carrying out some 5,696 social 
audits (Vélez Fernàndez, Forthcoming).
Social auditing can help fight corruption 
Social audits are key to promoting ‘public 
vigilance’ and monitoring the implementation 
of government projects and policies. They can 
help uncover corrupt practices in different 
ways: first, by encouraging citizens to pay 
more attention to the rules and functioning of 
the education system; second, by comparing 
official information with that provided by 
end users; and third, by facilitating exchange 
with those in charge of projects or policies, 
and then holding them to account. Speaking 
more globally, by re-balancing roles and 
responsibilities, social audits can help to 
prevent the abuse of power.Social auditing also results in the creation 
of new spaces where citizens and officials 
can come together for better dialogue and 
collective decision-making. As emphasized by 
Berthin (2009), social auditing ‘can enhance 
the ability of citizens to move beyond mere 
protest and/or apathy, toward a process 
that helps to engage with bureaucrats 
and decision makers in a more informed, 
organized, constructive and systematic 
manner, thus increasing the chances of 
effecting positive change’. IIEP Policy Brief / Open Government in Education N°5 / 2021
Contact information 
This brief was written by Muriel 
Poisson, IIEP Programme Specialist 
and Coordinator of the Institute’s 
research project on ‘Open government 
in education: Learning from 
experience’. It has benefitted from an 
initial document search carried out by 
Sanskruti Gholsakar, Consultant. 
For further information, contact:  
Muriel Poisson 
m.poisson@iiep.unesco.org
IIEP-UNESCO
7-9 rue Eugène Delacroix
75016 Paris, France
Tel: +33 1 45 03 77 00
Fax: +33 1 40 72 83 66
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.orgReferences
Berthin, G. 2011. A Practical Guide to Social 
Audit as a Participatory Tool to Strengthen 
Democratic Governance, Transparency and 
Accountability. Panama: UNDP, http://www.
undp-aciac.org/publications/ac/books/
practicalguide-socialaudit-e.pdf
Bhatty, K. 2021. Open Government in 
Education: Learning from Social Audits in 
India. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Delhi: Centre 
for Policy Research, https://etico.iiep.
unesco.org/en/resource/open-government-
education-learning-social-audits-india.
Vélez Fernàndez, M. Forthcoming. Auditoría 
social: el programa “Auditores juveniles”. 
Paris: IIEP-UNESCO. Lima: La Contraloría.Further reading
Huss, O.; Keudel, O. 2020.  Open Government 
in Education: Clarifying Concepts and 
Mapping Initiatives. Paris: IIEP-UNESCO, 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000373142/PDF/373142eng.pdf.multi
To learn more about IIEP’s research in the 
area, consult the ETICO online platform  
devoted to ethics and corruption in 
education. You can also contact us by e-mail 
at: etico@iiep.unesco.org . 
Also in this series of briefs: Poisson, M. 202I. 
Open Government/Open Budgeting/Open 
Contracting/Open Policy ­Making: Illustrative 
Forms of Open Government in Education. 
Paris: IIEP-UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this review do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of 
UNESCO or IIEP concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries. 
© UNESCO 2021 — This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access 
Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). The present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication.
© Shutterstock