Muriel Poisson
Developing open school data policies: 
Basic principlesThe views and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily represent those of UNESCO or IIEP. The designations employed and the 
presentation of material do not imply the ex pression of any opinion whatsoever on the part 
of UNE  SCO or IIEP concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area, or its 
authorities, or concerning its frontiers or boundaries.
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attri  bution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-
BY-SA 3.0 IGO) licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the 
content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO 
Open Access Repository (http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). The 
present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication.
Published by:
International Institute for Educational Planning
7–9 rue Eugène Delacroix, 75116 Paris
info@iiep.unesco.org
www.iiep.unesco.org
Cover photo: Shutterstock
© UNESCO 20213
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesOpen School Data: Preamble
The term ‘Open school data’ refers to all information about school inputs, processes, and/or 
outputs that are shared with the general public.
Open school data (OSD) are primary data, disaggregated at school level, which allow school 
inputs, processes, and/or outputs to be quantified. They cover, for instance, school budgets; 
student enrolment; teacher numbers, qualifications, and attendance; pupil/teacher ratios; 
condition of school facilities; textbook availability; and student test results. They are shared 
with the general public, in either paper or electronic format. To be useful, however, they need 
to be relevant, comprehensive, accurate, timely, accessible, and free of charge.
The release of school data to the public is being implemented in a growing number of countries. 
Several factors have contributed to this 
worldwide trend: the exponential increase in 
data availability due to the development of 
new technologies and the internet; the growing 
recognition of citizens’ right to information in a 
context of the democratization of societies; the 
rising importance of anti-corruption measures 
on the public agenda; and the emergence of 
a new administrative culture characterized by 
data-driven decision-making and performance-
based evaluation. 
Open school data policies should aim at promoting inclusive and equitable quality education 
for all.
Open school data should be used to help monitor the services provided by the school, hold 
school and education authorities accountable accordingly, and support their actions in 
furtherance of inclusive and equitable quality education for all, using a collaborative approach. 
These data equip citizens with a powerful tool to exert social control over the use of public 
resources, and thereby help them to stand up for their rights. 
To help decision-makers and educational planners and managers take informed decisions 
regarding the development of open school data policies, eight key principles should be applied:
1. Designing OSD as part of the school planning cycle
2. Promoting accountability at the core of OSD
3. Giving priority to data that can drive positive change
4. Considering OSD as a public good, building on EMIS
5. Presenting and sharing data in multiple, creative ways
6. Ensuring that the public know how to use OSD
7. Making OSD 'actionable'
8. Addressing ethical risks up-frontWhat factors contribute to OSD 
development?
 yData revolution
 yDemand for more democracy and 
citizen involvement
 yAccountability and anti-
corruption agenda
 yFocus on public sector 
performance and evaluation 4
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesPrinciple 1. Open school data policies should be designed as part of the school 
planning cycle, with the aim of responding more effectively to community 
concerns.
When designing open school data policies, decision-makers should start by reviewing the 
main reasons why various categories of stakeholder would access and use such data. Their 
first responsibility should be to those for whom this information is new yet of key importance, 
since these are the primary users of educational services –  parents, pupils, and communities. 
Decision-makers should also give due attention to teachers as stakeholders, since experience 
shows that they can play a very active role in making use of the data. Finally, decision-makers 
should determine clearly who needs what data and for which purposes.
Table 1. Data beneficiaries and their reasons for accessing data
Data beneficiaries Reasons for accessing data
 •Central/local education 
authorities •Central/local planning
 •Monitoring of school performance
 •Holding school authorities accountable
 •School authorities  •School planning and development
 •Reporting to central/local education authorities
 •Reporting to parents and communities
 •Collecting feedback from users
 •Teachers  •Monitoring of school status and performance
 •Monitoring of pupil advancement and performance
 •Reporting to parents and communities
 •Collecting feedback from users
 •Asking for better school conditions
 •Holding school/education authorities accountable
 •Parents, pupils, 
communities •Monitoring of school status and performance
 •Taking informed decisions about schooling
 •Asking for better school conditions
 •Holding school/education authorities accountable
 •Civil society  •Conducting advocacy work
Open school data policies should be conceived as part of the school planning cycle. They can 
improve the analysis of the status of education at school level, which helps in finding solutions to 
the problems identified, as well as in 
monitoring and evaluating the progress 
achieved. A policy framework should be 
put together on this basis, setting 
manageable objectives and formulating 
a theory of change explaining how to 
reach those objectives. It should clarify 
the roles and responsibilities of all the 
stakeholders involved, giving due 
attention to incentives needed to 
encourage them to participate. Adequate 
funding and time should be set aside for 
implementing the framework.
© Shutterstock5
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesFigure 1. Theory of change linking stakeholders’ motivations and changes in behaviour
Source: Cheng and Moses, 2016.
Principle 2. Promoting accountability should be placed at the core of open school 
data policies.
Open school data policies should be used to strengthen three main domains of accountability: 
financial accountability, to ensure that resources are allocated and used in a correct and 
timely manner; management accountability, to guarantee that all management operations 
(e.g. admission process, staff management, procurement, and organization of exams) follow 
official procedures; and pedagogical accountability, to make sure that students’ results are in 
line with the standards set by education authorities.
Table 2. Major domains of accountability targeted by open school data policies 
Three domains where OSD can be used to hold public authorities/schools accountable
Resources are allocated/
used in a timely and correct 
mannerAll management-related 
activities follow proceduresStudents’ results are in line 
with set standards
Financial  
accountabilityManagement  
accountabilityPedagogical  
accountability
In order to encourage school actors to use open school data to fight against corruption, input 
tracking data should be given priority. Data related to school budgets, school equipment, number 
of teachers, number of textbooks, and parental fees can indeed help monitor areas that are 
particularly vulnerable to corrupt practices. Open school data policies should be included as part 
of a broader framework for addressing unethical and corrupt practices in the education sector.
An active campaign should be launched to encourage school actors to make use of open 
school data in order to inquire about corrupt practices and to denounce them. These efforts 
should be supported with adequate training. Hotlines and complaint mechanisms should also 
be put in place, so that cases of fund leakage, ghost teachers, or corrupt purchasing practices, 
for instance, can be easily reported. Measures to protect complainants against retaliation 
should be adopted. The consequences of breaking the rules should be clearly established, 
and proportionate sanctions imposed when needed.6
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesAt the same time, however, open school data should not be used as a tool to challenge the 
authority of educational bodies, particularly at school level. Rather, they should serve as a tool 
to promote mutual accountability, to foster trust, and to build a culture of open government 
within the education system. This is possible only when all stakeholders –  teachers, parents, 
and the community –  can be held responsible through the use of open school data. The 
importance of user participation and of collaborative planning should be valued accordingly.
Principle 3. Not all data are useful: data that can drive positive change should be 
given priority.
A wide variety of data on school inputs (e.g. funding), processes (e.g. teacher attendance), 
and outputs (e.g. student achievement) can be shared with the general public, but they 
should be selected carefully and limited in number. Six main categories of data should be 
considered: (i) basic information about the school, e.g. its location and status; (ii) school 
finance, including parental funding; (iii)  availability and condition of school goods and 
services; (iv) school governance and operation, covering parent participation in particular; (v) 
school efficiency and performance as measured by student achievement; and (vi) parent and 
pupil satisfaction. Data should be presented primarily in statistical form, although some can 
be of a qualitative nature.
Table 3. Six main categories of data to be considered
School 
profile •School location (urban/rural)
 •Status (public/private)
 •Accreditation
 •Enrolment figures
 •Special education 
information
 •Language of instruction
 •Health and nutritional status
 •School newsFinance •School budget
 •Parental contributions
 •Other sources of income
 •Donations
 •Stipends
Condition of 
services •Number of teachers
 •Qualification of teachers
 •Availability of facilities, 
equipment, and materials
 •Condition of facilities, 
equipment, and materials
 •School safetySchool 
governance  
and 
operation •Governance structure
 •Inspection
 •School projects
 •Community participation
Efficiency 
and 
performance •Promotion, repetition, 
completion, retention, 
dropout rate
 •Pupil attendance
 •Teacher presence
 •Student learning outcomes
 •School awardsParent/pupil 
satisfaction •Parent/pupil satisfaction
 •Complaints
Several types of data should be given particular consideration: (i) data of particular relevance 
for users – mainly those related to the learning environment and to learners; (ii) data that are 
problem-focused –  for instance, on the lack of availability of midday meals or textbooks, or low 
teacher attendance – and call for immediate solutions; and (iii) data with the potential to hold 
public and school authorities accountable for whatever forms part of their duties. In a context 
of public education, particular attention should be given to any financial contributions that 
parents make to the school. 7
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesThe data thus selected should provide an accurate picture of the current situation of each school. 
Ideally, they should be at least partially standardized and consistent over time, in order to allow 
comparisons between schools, to situate each school with reference to national standards, and 
to monitor the progress made by every school. In addition, given the important role played by 
private schools in most countries, data from them should also be included as much as possible.
Principle 4. Open school data should be considered a public good, building on the 
strength of the educational management information systems in place.
What are basic data 
requirements?
 •Quality
 •Accuracy
 •Timeliness
 •Comparability
 •Consistency over time
 •AccessibilityMinistries of education (or offices in charge of 
educational statistics) should take the lead in disclosing 
school data to all citizens, building on existing 
educational management information systems (EMIS). 
Educational data should be considered a public good 
and their disclosure mandated by law. EMIS managers 
should be equipped with new software and electronic 
tools that make it easier to manage, clean, analyse, and 
share big data on a large scale. Efforts should be made 
to digitize and synchronize data at all levels of the 
system in order to reduce errors, manipulations and time lag.
In their handling of open school data, especially in combining management and participation-
oriented approaches, government authorities could learn from the experience of civil society 
organizations. A management-oriented approach encourages local and school authorities 
to use school data to identify strengths and weaknesses, to inform the school improvement 
plan, and to direct budgetary operations accordingly. A participation-oriented approach 
encourages the school community at large to make use of school data to voice their concerns 
and to hold schools and/or local authorities accountable.
Figure 2. Combining management-  and participation-oriented approaches
Management-oriented 
approach (top-down 
feedback)
  Participation-oriented 
approach (bottom-up 
feedback)
  Mixed approach 
(combination of the two)
In order to reduce the risk of 
misinterpretation and/or errors, as 
well as any tensions generated by the 
disclosure of itself, a number of good 
practices should be adopted: limiting the 
number of administrative levels involved 
in data collection; diversifying sources 
of information; organizing technical 
training for the local staff in charge of 
data collection and monitoring; involving 
users in data collection and monitoring; 
undertaking regular data checks and 
audits; reducing time lag between data 
collection and release; updating data in 
real time, on a continuous basis.
School notice board in Brisbane, Australia
© Shutterstock8
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesPrinciple 5. The diversification of communication methods produces multiple, 
creative ways to present and share data with the public.
Data should be presented in a simple way, using school report cards. Users should be given 
access to several levels of presentation, ranging from a simplified and easy-to-understand 
level to more technical and complex ones. The language used should be easy to grasp by 
a wide audience. All statistical and technical terms should be clearly defined. An attractive 
design should be favoured, using an appropriate font and colours. Summary tables, graphics, 
icons, and other types of illustration should be inserted whenever possible.
Multiple methods for data dissemination should be explored and adapted to meet the needs 
of users. Both offline and online channels should be made use of. Offline channels display 
information on paper in an area that is easy for all to view, such as the school’s public notice 
board (see photo) or during public meetings. Online channels are databases made accessible 
through the internet, using computers or mobile devices. Online channels offer greater 
opportunities to present and cross-check information, and even to produce tailored reports, 
but offline channels are of particular importance for individuals who do not have access to the 
internet, and/or are not computer literate.
  
Source: CERCA (Civic Engagement for Education Reform Program in Central America); MySchool (https://www.myschool.edu.au/)
Data comparisons should be properly framed: to avoid the risk of oversimplification or 
misinterpretation, comparisons between schools should be limited to schools with similar 
socio-educational characteristics. In order to highlight the development of schools over time, 
time series should be encouraged. The experience of high-gain schools, whose performance 
has rapidly increased over time, should be analysed and widely disseminated. Success stories 
should also be shared as a source of inspiration. Finally, regular enquiries should be carried out 
in order to collect feedback from users about the relevance, clarity, and usefulness of the data 
that have been publicly shared in this way.
Principle 6. The public should not only be made aware of the existence of open 
school data, they should also know how to use them. 
Ordinary people have no reason to access and use open school data if they don’t know how to 
interpret them, if they don’t realize the potential of the data to promote inclusive and equitable 
quality education for all, and if they don’t know 
how to generate change based on these data. 
For these reasons, awareness campaigns 
aimed at informing citizens about their rights 
and entitlements regarding education, as 
well as the possibility for them to provide 
feedback and suggest improvements, should 
be encouraged. Such campaigns should be 
conducted in local languages, using radio, local 
press, banners, posters, leaflets, and any other 
media suitable for maximum outreach. 
Awareness campaigns and training 
should help to avoid:
 yOversimplification of complex 
issues
 yMisinterpretation of data
 yEmpowering the empowered
 yFrustrations and tensionsOnline school report cards in Australia
 Offline school report cards in El Salvador9
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesBeyond awareness activities, a comprehensive capacity-building programme targeting 
various groups of stakeholders should be offered. It should aim to impart the necessary 
knowledge and tools that will allow them to access and use data in a meaningful way. More 
specifically, it should guide them on how to interpret data, how to use them to monitor the 
school budget or introduce pedagogical changes, and, more generally, how to build on this 
information to suggest possible improvements. School administrators, school management 
committee members, and teachers should be mobilized to organize cascade training (training 
of trainers) designed especially for mothers.
Table 4. Examples of training to be provided by various categories of stakeholder
Categories of stakeholder Examples of training topics
 •Local education 
authorities •How to collect, manage, and control data
 •School authorities and 
teachers •How to analyse data and draw useful conclusions from them
 •How to use data to introduce pedagogical changes
 •How to share data with parents and communities
 •How to encourage feedback and use it to introduce changes
 •Parents  •How to monitor the school budget
 •How to use data for school improvement
 •How to speak with a collective voice
 •Students  •How to use data for school improvement
 •Civil society/facilitators  •How to facilitate meetings with the school community
 •How to ensure the participation of lower socio-economic 
groups
Principle 7 . Open school data should be ‘actionable’: stakeholders should be given 
the authority to take action based on the information provided. 
In order to foster dialogue, school authorities should be required to organize face-to-face 
meetings with parents (including mothers) and other community members. During those 
meetings, data should be presented and discussed. The objective should be to help the 
public understand data, interpret them, and draw conclusions from them. The success of the 
meetings is conditioned by the capacity of facilitators to moderate exchanges in an inclusive 
way, so that everyone’s voice is heard.
In illiterate or semi-illiterate communities, specific measures should be taken to enable 
everyone to participate. These include providing refreshments to encourage disadvantaged 
groups to come to the school; reading 
the data out loud during meetings; 
using traditional communication 
modes, such as dance, drama, and 
folk songs when sharing information; 
breaking into smaller groups that 
encourage everyone to take the floor 
(see photo); holding separate events 
just for pupils; rewarding those 
most actively involved; and setting 
up information desks to respond to 
queries. 
Community meeting in Jodhpur, India
© Shutterstock10
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesWhen organizing face-to-face meetings, school authorities should build as far as possible 
on existing consultation and exchange platforms, such as school management committee 
meetings, mothers’ gatherings, and community assemblies. They should also piggyback on 
special events such as Education Day, the Day of Excellence, or other school ceremonies. 
Whenever appropriate, civil society groups and community organizations should be mobilized 
to facilitate dialogue, reduce possible tensions, and elicit contributions productive of action.
Education authorities should be compelled to provide timely responses to the requests and 
proposals thus formulated. According to the issues raised, different administrative levels 
–  school, local, or central –  may need to be involved. The principle of subsidiarity, whereby 
decisions are taken at the most decentralized or local level, should apply here. Roles and 
responsibilities for addressing requests should be made clear. In cases where no follow-up 
action is taken, citizens should be given the right to raise a complaint at a higher level.
Principle 8. The ethical risks associated with open school data should be 
addressed up-front.
Even though open school data are published at institutional rather than individual level, their 
publication can raise a series of ethical problems: 
 • Open school data build on large databases which gather individual data about pupils 
and teachers. In order to avoid any attempts to track or commercialize such information, 
individual data privacy should be carefully protected by law and adequate security 
protocols.
 • When schools are very small in size –  one-teacher schools, for instance –  it becomes quite 
easy to link school information to specific individuals. Therefore, in order to prevent any 
risk of disclosing ‘direct identifiers’, a minimum threshold for reporting aggregated data 
should be set.
 •Some data related to the profile of populations whose children are enrolled at school, such 
as ethnicity, caste, or religion, can foster stigmatization and bias. In order to avoid exclusion 
or eviction, such data should not be published.
 • In fragile countries or during a state of emergency (see photo), ordinary information, such as 
geo-localization data, can raise safety problems. Profile data related to certain populations 
benefitting from school services, such as minority groups or refugees, may also raise security 
problems. Here again, disclosure should be avoided.
Refugee pupils in Bangladesh
© Shutterstock11
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesTable 5. Selected ethical issues associated with open school data
What ethical risks? How to address them
 •No respect of data privacy
 •Tracking of individuals
 •Commercialization of 
individual data •Adopt adequate legislation to protect individual data privacy in 
education
 •Establish strong security protocols to protect large databases, 
including individual data
 •Set a minimum threshold for reporting aggregated data
 •Make sure that direct identifiers are not disclosed
 •Stigmatization and bias, 
leading to exclusion or 
eviction •Identify data that can lead to stigmatization and bias 
depending on context, and take the decision not to publish 
them
 •Safety issues  •Identify data that can lead to security issues in certain 
contexts, and take the decision not to publish them
Table 6 below summarizes the actions needed to design and implement open school data 
policies, by stakeholder group.Developing open school data policies: 
Basic principles12
iiep.unesco.orgTable 6. Matrix of actions needed to design and implement open school data, by stakeholder group
ActionsCentral 
governmentLocal  
authoritiesSchool 
authoritiesParents  Pupils  Community Civil society
Design an open data policy framework X
Adopt legal provisions on school data 
disclosureX
Select critical data with potential to 
generate positive changeX X X
Set up robust education information 
management systemsX X
Organize/participate in training on data 
collection, monitoring, and controlX X X
Implement and monitor data collection X X X X X
Set up online and offline channels to 
access dataX X
Conduct advocacy campaigns X X X
Organize/participate in training to 
interpret and act upon informationX X X X X X X
Organize/participate in meetings 
to discuss data and improvement 
strategiesX X X X X
Introduce hotlines and complaint 
mechanismsX X X
Provide timely responses to requests 
received and proposals formulatedX X X13
iiep.unesco.orgDeveloping open school data policies: 
Basic principlesFurther reading
Ten books have been published by IIEP-UNESCO in connection with its research programme 
‘Using open school data to improve transparency and accountability in education’ and as part 
of its series on Ethics and Corruption in Education. They analyse and draw conclusions from 
more than 60 open school data initiatives carried out in about 50 countries from all regions of 
the world.
Bordoloi, Mridusmita; Kapoor, Varun. 2018. India: Using Open School Data to Improve 
Transparency and Accountability.
Brito, Alejandra. 2019. Información y transparencia: cuadros de indicadores de las escuelas en 
América Latina.
Cheng, Xuejiao Joy; Moses, Kurt. 2016. Promoting Transparency through Information: A Global 
Review of School Report Cards.
Dupain, Jonathan; Thuphuong Nguyen, Lena. 2019. Information and Transparency: School 
Report Cards in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Felicia, Nisa. 2018. Indonesia: Using Open School Data to Improve Transparency and 
Accountability.
Khan, Kashmali. 2018. Punjab, Pakistan: Using Open School Data to Improve Transparency and 
Accountability .
Parafina, Redempto S. 2018. Philippines: Using Open School Data to Improve Transparency and 
Accountability .
Poisson, Muriel. 2020. Open School Data: What Planners Need to Know .
Rabinowitz, Stanley. 2018. Australia: Using Open School Data to Improve Transparency and 
Accountability .
Roy, Dipu; Said Md. Juel Miah, Abu. 2018. Bangladesh: Using Open School Data to Improve 
Transparency and Accountability .
For more information on the research programme entitled ‘Ethics and Corruption in 
Education’, visit the ETICO resource platform: http://etico.iiep.unesco.org . Over 40 titles 
published under this IIEP series are available for download.About the basic principles
The release of school data –  i.e. all information about school inputs, 
processes, and/or outputs that are shared with the general public –  is 
being implemented in a growing number of countries. These data equip 
citizens with a powerful tool to exert social control over the use of 
public resources, and thereby help them to stand up for their rights. 
To help decision-makers and educational planners and managers 
take informed decisions regarding the development of open 
school data (OSD) policies, this document formulates eight key 
principles: from considering OSD as a public good building on 
existing information systems, to giving priority to data that can 
drive positive change, and addressing ethical risks up front.  
About the author
Muriel Poisson is a Programme Specialist at IIEP-UNESCO, in charge 
of the Institute’s project on ‘Ethics and Corruption in Education’. She is 
responsible for research and training activities in this area, on subjects 
including public expenditure tracking surveys, teacher codes of conduct, 
transparency in the management of pro-poor incentives, academic 
integrity, open school data, and open government in education.