ASSESSING 
INTERNET 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
Using UNESCO’s Internet 
Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsGERMANY
Leibniz Institute for Media Research | Hans-Bredow-Institut
Note: This is an assessment of 109 core indicators and 21 contextual indicators instead of the full set 
of 303 indicators, and it is therefore not intended to cover all dimensions of the digital ecosystem in the country, 
but serves to take stock of significant progress and signal those gaps in a need to be improved in adhering to 
ROAM framework. As the Internet environment is changing very fast, so are the data collected and analysis and 
recommendations made upon. UNESCO encourages countries to continue the dialogues about the findings, and to 
update the assessment after due time while also keeping track of the latest developments to monitor and adapt and 
sometimes strengthen the recommendations to further enhance their impact, as appropriate.Executive Summary
An analysis based on the UNESCO Internet Universality Indicators 
(ROAM-X)
UNESCO’s position on Internet issues has been guided, since 2015, by the concept of Internet 
Universality. At its core is an Internet where human rights are respected, protected and guaranteed 
through the creation of national Internet policies that promote the development of knowledge 
societies and are based on sustainable digitalisation and digitalised sustainability.
UNESCO has defined the principles that underpin its Internet Universality concept and these 
are known as the ROAM-X principles. These advocate for an Internet that is based on Human 
Rights, that is Open and Accessible to all and is designed and developed with Multi-stakeholder 
participation.
An assessment of the state of the Internet on the basis of the ROAM-X principles is essential if 
progress is to be made in the development of a national digital policy. This basis provides a 
holistic tool for the assessment of the Internet development level and thus allows evidence-based 
policy improvements to be made. These can, in turn, foster Internet Universality as a positive 
factor for sustainable development.
Project team
Professor Dr. Wolfgang Schulz is Director of the Leibniz Institute for Media Research | 
Hans-Bredow-Institut (HBI), Director of the Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society (HIIG) and 
Professor of Public Law and Media Law at the University of Hamburg. Professor Dr. Matthias 
C. Kettemann, is Research Programme Head at the HBI and Professor of Innovation, Theory 
and Philosophy of Law at the University of Innsbruck, and Research Group Head at the HIIG. 
Dipl.-Soz. Hermann-Dieter Schröder is Senior Researcher at the HBI. Ass. Jur. Anna 
Sophia Tiedeke and Martin Fertmann are Junior Researchers at the HBI. Katharina 
Mosene, MA is an expert in research cooperation and strategy at the HBI and the HIIG. 
Corinna Endreß is an intern at the HBI and Julius Böke, Linda Schleif and Anna 
Zapfe are student assistants at the HBI.
3
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsLeibniz Institute for Media Research | Hans-Bredow-Institut
The Leibniz Institute for Media Research | Hans-Bredow-Institut (HBI) researches media change and 
the related structural shifts in public communication. It combines basic research and research on 
knowledge transfer from cross-media, interdisciplinary and independent scholarly perspectives. 
Thus, the Institute is a valued provider of problem-specific knowledge for policy, economy and 
civil society.
This problem-oriented research includes a special interest in the respective ‘new’ media where 
the Institute is eager to make a contribution to their understanding and design. The Institute 
combines conducting long-term investigations based on research fundamentals with practice-
oriented expertise in the service of policy, economy and civil society. The HBI’s work is always 
committed to the standards of excellence in research and the principle of the independence of 
research.
In its research, the Institute combines a variety of research disciplines. The focus is on the 
perspective of an empirically underpinned social science and a legal analysis oriented 
towards regulatory processes. The combination of these two perspectives is one of the special 
characteristics that distinguish the Institute from other research organizations in Germany and 
abroad.
International comparative research is of increasing importance for the Institute. The Institute is 
increasingly establishing itself as a hub in an international network of research organizations 
with its cooperation projects at European and global levels, the exchange of researchers as 
well as international conferences and specialist events.
Executive Summary
This report presents the findings of the application to Germany of the Internet Universality 
Indicators, developed by UNESCO with a view to promoting inclusive knowledge societies1; 
the research and analysis for this report was carried out in December 2020 by a team at the 
Leibniz Institute for Media Research | Hans-Bredow-Institut. The report contains the findings for 
all the core indicators proposed by UNESCO as well as for the contextual indicators.
The evaluation followed a multi-stakeholder approach and was based on the UNESCO evaluation 
guidelines. The process was reported on at various stages at national and international Internet 
governance events. A multistakeholder advisory board made up of German Internet policy 
experts provided support in developing the recommendations, which were also discussed in a 
validation workshop in November 2020.
1 UNESCO (2019a).
4
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
The Internet in Germany: a public good, a fundamental right  
and the backbone of digitalisation
In the country where Gutenberg’s letterpress printing technique launched a media revolution, 
the overall state of the Internet is good. The review of all the key digitalisation categories – 
rights, openness, access, multi-stakeholder participation and social framework – on the basis 
of the ROAM-X indicators developed by UNESCO showed a future-oriented evolution. Under 
the conditions of digitalisation, in 2020, this means that security sensitive Internet access and 
competence-based confident Internet use are essential and will become increasingly important.
The focus of this research investigation was admittedly ‘the Internet’ in Germany. However, in 
the research report, the term has been understood very broadly, in the sense of the ROAM-X 
principles. There was not merely an examination of the Internet in the narrower sense, such as its 
stability and Internet access, but also of the change processes - economic, social, cultural, legal 
and political - that were initiated as a result of the permeation of information and communication 
technologies into all areas of society, thus, ‘digitalisation’. ‘Digitalisation’ is indeed more than 
the ‘Internet’, however, Internet-mediated communication is a key feature of digitalisation.
Despite sensible steps such as creating a digital budget and the publication of the digital 
dashboard for the implementation of the digitalisation strategy, nevertheless, potential for 
improvement was still be identified, above all, by improving the coherence of policy development, 
by coordinating digital support measures and by ensuring the use of the Internet by all people 
in accordance with fundamental rights.
Some 91% of people in Germany already use the Internet and 16.5 million .de domains have 
been registered. German policy makers have committed themselves, at the highest level, to the 
right to Internet access for everyone. Internet access in Germany has been realised, with a few 
exceptions, on a nationwide basis and is stable and affordable. It should be emphasised that 
in 2020 there was no network overload at any time during the COVID-19 pandemic, despite 
the increased telephone use, video conferencing and streaming. Yet, in Germany, too, gender, 
immigrant backgrounds, non-traditional educational trajectories and employment histories as 
well as age are powerful factors that jeopardise the full realisation of all human rights on the 
Internet and through the Internet. We have too few reliable data about those who do not use 
the Internet, about the use of the Internet by people with immigrant backgrounds and about 
those who have (often multiple) experiences of discrimination and exclusion in Germany - 
mediated by the Internet and amplified by the platform logic -, those confronted with ‘digital 
violence’ or even with people radicalised on the Internet in offline contexts. A development that 
is jeopardising both individual rights and social cohesion is the prevalence of hate speech and 
digital violence on the Internet. This particularly affects women as well as people and groups 
who have experienced marginalisation.
5
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
The full and equal participation of everyone has to be ensured in all areas of activity of 
government with a digital aspect by using the right tools and measures. This includes being alert 
to problems with respect to data collection, better promotion of gender sensitive cultural change 
in the technology industry as well as the structural and substantive expansion of the protection of 
the fundamental rights of vulnerable groups – especially those who are exposed in multiple ways.
Important legislative amendments in the digital arena relating to the ROAM-X principles result from 
the need to implement EU law, which is why its effect, especially in the area of media regulations 
and the governance of intermediaries, is essential. Existing regulations at the European level are 
also characterised by conceptual dependencies, overlaps and certain contradictions, especially 
since the ‘Internet’ regulatory area is affected by various European legal acts.
In the discussion about formulating German digital foreign policy, safeguarding international 
communication flows and understanding, regardless of borders, so that they are protected, in 
particular in a way as set the UN civil pact, plays an important role. Germany is making a 
constructive contribution to the reform processes related to the architectures for digital cooperation 
and is providing substantial support for global multi-stakeholder-based Internet governance. 
Germany supports the reform processes related to the architectures for digital cooperation and 
is one of the largest national supporters of a global, multi-stakeholder-based digital policy and 
Internet governance.
The comprehensive guaranteeing of cybersecurity internally and contributing to enhancing 
cybersecurity through responsible state behaviour externally are key state functions that have to 
be taken seriously by all authorities, especially the judiciary and administration. Particularly in 
view of the growing differentiation in responsibility for cybersecurity, close interlinking of EU, 
federal and federal state authorities is just as important as clarifying the lines of responsibility 
within the national cybersecurity architecture.
A properly understood digitalisation policy can make an important contribution to securing 
people’s livelihoods and, with the appropriate democratic control, safeguarding individual 
spheres of freedom as well as strengthening the cohesion of societies. Beyond the 2030 target 
year of the UN sustainability goals, digitalisation should be put at the disposal of sustainability 
across all policy areas.
R - Rights
Digitally relevant fundamental and human rights are protected by German authorities and courts 
on the basis of the Basic Law and European and international human rights. The German Network 
Enforcement Act (NetzDG) - the first piece of legislation worldwide enacted to regulate the 
content governance practices of platforms - was perceived internationally as a significant legal 
initiative to bind platform content to national law. However, it also raised serious European and 
constitutional concerns and was imitated in countries where the rule of law is considered to be 
6
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
significantly less robust. In any case, a mandatory human rights impact assessment (including the 
consequences of a possible role model function for other states) as part of the digital legislative 
process seems desirable.
O - Openness
Germany has earned a place among the top ten countries in the Network Readiness Index. 
This index measures the innovative use of information and communication technology (ICT) by 
countries, although the favourable ranking was also achieved through Germany’s economic 
strength. Every fifth newly founded company has strong digital relevance. However, there is a 
lack of meaningful figures on digital accessibility. The teaching of digital skills is now a part of 
education programmes. The federal structure can open up space for experimental work here. 
With its E-government Act, Germany has taken another step towards transparent government 
activity and open data.
A - Access
According to various sources, between 91% and 94% of households in Germany use the Internet. 
In the group of young adults (16–24 years), almost 100% now use the Internet. In an international 
comparison, the costs of Internet access are still high in terms of household income, but have 
recently fallen. Broadband expansion in Germany is clearly lagging behind when compared 
internationally. Although the speed of Internet connections in Germany has doubled overall in 
the past three years, there are still regional differences in relation to rural regions, the eastern 
federal states and small towns.
There are large differences regarding Internet use with regard to employment - some 96% of 
Germans who have jobs use the Internet compared to only 68% of the unemployed. Education is 
also important – 96% of Germans with a higher level of education are online, in contrast to this 
only around 60% of Germans with a low level of education are online. The Federal Government 
has committed itself to ensuring that everyone can connect to the Internet anytime and that their 
fundamental right to privacy protection is respected. The basis for this was provided by the 
coalition agreement of 2018, including the plan to create a legal right to nationwide access to 
high-speed Internet by 2025. More data needs to be collected on the issues of which particular 
challenges arise when people with an immigration background use the Internet, and how the 
advantages of using the Internet independently and on the basis of skills could be conveyed to 
people who are not yet online.
M - Multistakeholder
Germany is effectively helping to shape the guidelines of future Internet governance internationally 
and is constantly and strategically advocating Internet governance based on the multi-stakeholder 
7
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
approach. The Federal Government is committed to actively involving interest groups in the 
development of national Internet guidelines and Internet-related legislative projects; however, 
the interaction is not systematic; moreover, short deadlines for comments are counterproductive. 
Comprehensive consultation procedures and the digital summit are welcome, as are ad hoc 
participation models conducted by citizens. Most recently, the Federal Government organised the 
successful Internet Governance Forum 2019, in Berlin, and successfully endeavoured to integrate 
operators such as medium-sized enterprises that are not as strongly represented in digital policies. 
X - Cross-cutting Issues
Making the effects of digitalisation and the use of algorithmic systems non-discriminatory and, 
thus, helping to reduce gender inequalities is a key goal of the Federal Government. Greater 
efforts are needed to identify potentials for more intersectional consideration of discrimination 
factors and, particularly, the access, use and rights of people with physical and cognitive 
disabilities. Measures must also be taken here, including at the European regulatory level, to 
ensure transparency and accountability. Women are underrepresented in ICT and Internet-related 
leadership positions. Increasing the collection of disaggregated data would be beneficial for 
dealing with not just gender-specific hate speech but also the set of issues related to digital 
violence in a way that is sensitive to fundamental rights. Collecting such data would also facilitate 
a better digitalisation policy approach to the specific challenges of integrating people with an 
immigration background and people who do not use the Internet. Greater participation of groups 
and genders historically less strongly represented in the technical community in the development 
of IC technologies and products is also crucial for the further development of ICT in Germany 
that is sensitive to fundamental rights and non-discriminatory.
The most important recommendations for a sustainable digitalisation 
policy and a policy of sustainable digitalisation
The ‘Internet’ policy field is firmly anchored in German politics. Digital policy is increasingly 
perceived as a task for all societal creative forces. Important agendas relevant to digitalisation 
are the responsibility of different ministries. This requires the mutual recognition of the role and 
importance of different specialist policies, such as those for the network and media, the economy 
and industry, education, integration and culture (each with their own operators, instruments and 
logics) for sustainable digitalisation within the framework of a coherent digitalisation policy in 
Germany. Therefore, it makes sense to transition from various Internet policies (or policies with 
relevance for the Internet) to a cross-disciplinary, sustainable digitalisation policy; yet, at the 
same time, this needs to be a policy that is sustainable, protects fundamental rights, promotes 
cohesion and drives innovation.
8
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
Key Policy Recommendations
Government
• Implementation of the coalition agreement with the plan to create a legal right to nationwide 
access to high-speed Internet by 2025 and the implementation of the requisite infrastructure 
measures, possibly in cooperation with the private sector
• Design and implementation of measures to overcome the ‘digital divide’ in Internet use 
between Germans with a job (96%) and the unemployed (68%) and to counteract differences 
due to educational backgrounds
• Ongoing special consideration of the interests and needs of intersectionally2 discriminated 
groups in national digital political strategies, especially regarding the use of algorithmic 
systems
• Greater promotion of Internet use by people with an immigration background on the basis 
of reliable data collection
• Promotion of comprehensive equal treatment of girls and women in all areas of the Internet, 
from ICT education and the promotion of the learning of STEM subjects to the provision of tools 
to combat discrimination and exclusion on the Internet, also with regard to ‘digital violence’
• Investments in the technical and personnel requirements for the digitalisation of schools, with 
due regard for educational federalism, in particular through the impact-oriented application 
of the ‘DigitalPact School’
• More systematic promotion of openly licensed teaching and learning resources (OER) through 
prioritisation within the framework of political and regulatory framework processes
• Increased and systematic promotion of ICT-related teacher training
• Expansion of digital administrative services as part of the implementation of the Online Access 
Act and promotion of digital innovations in administration
• Enforcement and evaluation of existing transparency and moderation obligations of companies 
while taking into account the recommendation of the Council of Europe on the role and 
responsibility of states and Internet intermediaries (2018)
• Increased involvement of civil society and academia in public consultations, workshops 
and working groups on digital policy issues, setting appropriate deadlines and promoting 
academic access to public and private data as a basis for science-based policy
2 The term intersectionality is understood to mean the way various structural categories that generate inequality are linked and 
affect each other; associated structural categories are: gender, ethnicity, class, nationality, sexuality, age, etc.
9
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
• Introduction of a mandatory human rights impact assessment as part of the legislative process 
for digital issues and subsequent regular evaluation of the legislation
• Further engagement in international cooperation formats within the framework of a digital 
policy based on human and international rights and committed to the principles of multi-
stakeholder governance
Judiciary
• Realisation of the right to Internet access by upholding the relevant case law, which sees 
Internet access as a prerequisite for full participation in the social communication structures 
of society
• Expansion of the Internet-related training modules in training all those involved in the judicial 
sector
• Special consideration of the dangers and manifestations of digital violence during training 
for all levels of use of the judiciary
• Taking into account the goal of the greatest possible ‘compatibility’ for the legal systems 
to ensure global accessibility within the scope of legal leeway when deciding on the 
extraterritorial effects of judgments (for example, by paying due regard the instruments of the 
Internet Jurisdiction Network)
• Development of cyber forensics capabilities in all areas of the judiciary
• Increasing the number of prosecutors specialising in cybercrime
• Putting in place dedicated officers for hate speech (and digital violence) at the Public 
Prosecuting Agencies
Private Sector
• Implementation of the existing transparency and moderation obligations, depending on the 
size of the platform, paying due regard to the recommendation of the Council of Europe on 
the role and responsibility of states and Internet intermediaries (2018)
• Greater involvement of stakeholders to raise awareness of the impact of design features and 
user management of the products and platforms that are provided, as well as the involvement 
of private application partners in applied research on digital sovereignty in human-technology 
interaction
• Securing the highest possible level of protection for data while taking due account of European 
legal developments
• Protection of employee rights in the structural change processes that are driven by digitalisation
10
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
 Executive Summary• Overcoming the underrepresentation of women in the STEM area and targeted involvement 
of all genders in the development of ICT
Technical Community
• Development of Internet access alternatives for people with special access needs or with 
non-linear educational and employment biographies
• Strengthening cooperation with schools to highlight IT as a separate subject in addition to 
the cross-sectional treatment of digitalisation
• Optimisation of apps and websites with a view to cross-generational usability
• Providing technical solutions to achieve the highest possible level of privacy protection in the 
development of technical standards and products
• Greater involvement of groups and genders historically less represented in the technical 
community in the development of IC technologies and products
Civil Society
• Use of the increased opportunities for participation through Internet activism, e.g., through 
online participation of the population
• More conscious engagement of civil society organizations at local and regional levels 
beyond specifically ‘digital policy’ organizations in order to understand the value and effect 
of digitalisation on and for civil society engagement in all its ramifications
• Expansion of the offering for children and parents to minimise risks related to content and 
interaction as well as commercial risks online, but also to deal with problematic user-generated 
content and to self-regulate the duration of use
Academia
• Development of meaningful human rights assessment methods in order to implement procedures 
for assessing human rights impacts
• Continuation and stepping up of the critical monitoring of network policy and digital legislation 
at national and European levels, including the development of specific options for action
• Development and reinforcement of transfer research formats to optimise the ‘translation’ of 
academic knowledge in a way that is tailored to recipients
• Entering a process of self-reflection about the extent to which the visibility and acceptance 
of open access can be increased in the entire German academic system
11
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
• Collection of valid figures and statistics on, among other things, digital violence using 
diversity-sensitive categories and being aware of intersectional relationships and exclusion 
systems
• Formulation of target group and risk-specific approaches to help children and adolescents 
leverage the potential of the Internet and to provide them and their parents with a healthy 
understanding of risk
12
Assessing Internet Development in Germany • Using UNESCO’s Internet Universality ROAM-X IndicatorsExecutive Summary
