TO RECOVERY 
AND BEYOND
2021 UNESCO Report on 
Public Access to Information 
(SDG 16.10.2)
Published in 2022 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP , France
© UNESCO 2022 
ISBN 978-92-3-100504-6
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms 
of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).
For the use of any material not clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be requested from:  
publication.copyright@unesco.org or UNESCO Publishing, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP 
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any 
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or 
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not 
commit the Organization. The same disclaimer applies to commissioned UNESCO research cited in this study. 
This study should be cited as follows: To Recovery and Beyond: UNESCO 2021 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2), Paris.
UNESCO Research team:  
Dian Kuswandini and Khalid Aoutail.
Contributors:  
Lida Ayoubi (independent researcher); International IDEA (Alberto Fernandez Gibaja and Alexander Hudson); African Freedom of 
Information Centre. 
Graphic design, cover design and typeset:  
Aurélia Mazoyer / UNESCO. Cover illustration is based on the original vector by ©Flash Vector/shutterstock.com
Acknowledgements
UNESCO wishes to thank the following partners that supported the UNESCO 2021 Survey on Public Access to Information and in 
the preparation of this report: the International Conference of Information Commissioners (ICIC); the International Ombudsman 
Institute (IOI); Red de Transparencia y Acceso a la Informacion (RTA); the African Freedom of Information Centre (AFIC); International 
IDEA; Instituto Nacional de Transparencia, Acceso a la Información y Protección de Datos Personales (INAI) Mexico; UNDP and Oslo 
Governance Centre; African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) -African Union; Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, 
Just and Inclusive Societies; Marcos Mendiburu; Maxime Bouquet; Toby Mendel; national SDG focal points for data collection; and 
Permanent Delegations for UNESCO. Acknowledgements are also due to the UNESCO staff who provided substantial inputs to the 
preparation of the report, Guy Berger and Jaco du Toit, as well as UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 
This report is supported by Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands through the International Programme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC).
Printed in FranceSHORT SUMMARY
“Since wars begin in the minds of men and 
women it is in the minds of men and women 
that the defences of peace must be constructed”Building forward stronger  
with Access to Information
As countries are trying to emerge from the pandemic, the 
role of access to information continues to be critical in re-
building communities and their public institutions. The 
need for openness, transparency and accountability has 
never been stronger. The world has witnessed a growing 
public’s appetite for information that is accurate, timely 
and reliable. With civic space becoming more reduced 
during the pandemic, access to information has helped 
counterbalanced the situation, enabling public participation 
and civic engagement in response to the crisis. 
As the UN custodian agency for Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) Indicator 16.10.2, UNESCO continues to 
report not only on progress on the adoption and 
the implementation of Access to Information 
guarantees worldwide, but also promotes 
efforts around the issue, including 
reinforcing the strong relevance of access 
to information to the crisis recovery and 
the attainment of the SDGs as a whole. 
This report captures these different 
dimensions, presenting key findings from 
the 2021 UNESCO Survey on Public Access to 
Information, assessing progress in 102 participating 
countries. The report also provides policy makers, civil 
society, academia and those interested in SDG issues with 
different case studies and good practices with a special focus 
on rebuilding communities and public institutions with 
access to information.132
UN Member States 
have adopted  
Access to Information  
legal guarantees*
*  as of August 2021TO RECOVERY 
AND BEYOND
2021 UNESCO Report on 
Public Access to Information 
(SDG 16.10.2)CONTENTS
Executive summary 6
1.	 Background	and context	 8
1.1.  Access to Information and Sustainable Development 9
1.2.  UNESCO and the monitoring and reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 9
2. Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021 12
2.1.  Global overview: Adoption of ATI legal guarantees 13
2.2.  Reaching the furthest behind first: Inclusion of disability rights in ATI guarantees 14
2.3.  Highlights from 2021 UNESCO Survey on Public Access to Information  15
2.3.1.  Respondents and scores: There is a growing interest in reporting progress on ‘Access to Information’ , 
and countries with dedicated oversight institutions perform better 15
2.3.2.  Legal frameworks on Access to Information: National regulation systems are increasingly conducive 
to public access to information 16
2.3.3.  Limited scope of exemption: Most permissible exemptions are explicitly mentioned in ATI guarantees, 
but disaggregated data on refusals on this basis is still lacking  16
2.3.4.  Oversight mechanism: Dedicated ATI oversight institutions are well established in most countries, 
but not all monitor implementation of ATI guarantees and enforce its compliance 17
2.3.5.  Appeals mechanism: Record-keeping mechanisms exist in most countries, but much needs to be done 
to keep the data updated for reporting purposes  20
3.	 ATI	reporting	in	Voluntary National	Reviews	 22
4.	 Using	Access	to	Information	to	advance	the	SDGs:	case	studies	and good	practices	 26
4.1.  SDG 16 interlinkages: the role of Access to Information in COVID-19 recovery  27
4.2.  Shaping the way political systems work: Access to Information for inclusive, effective 
and accountable institutions 29
4.3.  Regional Focus: Commitment versus action in Africa – Implementation is as important as 
adoption of Access to Information laws 30
4.4.  National Focus: Promoting proactive transparency during COVID-19 in Mexico 32
4.5.  National Focus: Access to information by local authorities in Ukraine during  
the COVID-19 pandemic 33
Conclusion 35
5UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  EXECUTIVE  
SUMMARY
Goal 16:
“Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access 
to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels and 
inclusive societies.”
Target 16.10:
“Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with 
national legislation and international agreements.”
Indicator 16.10.1: 
“Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention and torture of journalists, 
associated media personnel, trade unionists and human rights advocates in the previous 12 months.”
* OHCHR as Custodian Agency; UNESCO and ILO as Contributing Agencies
Indicator 16.10.2: 
“Number of countries that adopt and implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to 
information.”
* UNESCO as Custodian Agency
As countries are trying to emerge from the COVID-19 
pandemic, the role of access to information (ATI) 
continues to be critical in rebuilding communities and 
strengthening their public institutions.
Since the spread of COVID-19 in early 2020, the world has 
witnessed a growing public demand for information that 
is accurate, timely and reliable. The need for openness, 
transparency, and accountability has never been 
stronger. With civic space becoming more reduced during the pandemic, and false content ever expanding, access 
to information has helped counterbalance the situation, 
serving as a tool for transparency, through which the public 
could exercise their right to request for information. This has 
enabled public participation and civic engagement in 
response to the crisis. 
As the UN custodian agency for SDG Indicator 16.10.2, 
UNESCO continues to report on progress on the adoption 
and the implementation of Access to Information legal UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Executive  summary
6guarantees worldwide. The Organization also promotes 
efforts to advocate for access to public information, including 
reinforcing its relevance to crisis recovery and the attainment 
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
This report captures these different dimensions, presenting 
key findings from the 2021 UNESCO Survey on Public Access 
to Information and offering different case studies and good 
practices with a special focus on rebuilding communities 
and public institutions with access to information. 
This year’s survey adopted a revised methodology, taking 
into account feedback from participating countries and 
independent experts in 2020. The new methodology was 
also tested by over 80 representatives of oversight institutions 
responsible for access to information worldwide, and further 
validated by the UN’s Inter-agency and Expert Group on 
Sustainable Development Goal Indicators. Launched in April 
2021, the survey engaged responses by 102 countries and 
territories, an increase by 48% compared to the previous 
year. This positive trend demonstrates a growing enthusiasm 
among countries in reporting on ‘Access to Information’ 
within the framework of the SDGs. 
The 2021 survey has yielded insights into the main 
tendencies in the implementation of legal guarantees for 
public access to information worldwide. The findings enable 
a better understanding of the gaps and challenges that 
need to be addressed by countries in their efforts towards 
achieving this SDG target. 
Among countries with ATI legal guarantees, the survey noted 
a positive trend towards acknowledging the importance of 
a dedicated arrangement within public bodies to deal 
with access to information, which in itself sets the foundation 
for proactive and reactive disclosure. 
Another finding is that countries that have a specialized 
oversight institution for access to information are likely to 
perform better than those without. On the other hand, the 
survey flagged some inconsistencies in data and information, 
signalling that record-keeping remains one of the major 
areas of improvement for these oversight institutions. Since 
what cannot be measured cannot be improved, it is essential 
to ensure adequate and reliable records of the requests and 
appeals received, so that evidence can be generated to track 
progress. The rolling-out the survey also demonstrated the important 
role of networks of oversight institutions in advocating 
for SDG monitoring and reporting, as well as mobilizing 
their members in taking part in global-wide activities 
related to the SDGs. This was made evident by the fact that 
80% of the respondents are members of the International 
Conference of Information Commissioners, the International 
Ombudsman Institute and Red de Transparencia y Acceso 
a la Información. These networks could serve as platforms, 
through which SDG monitoring and reporting could be 
improved over time, contributing to effective implementation 
of ATI guarantees. 
Reporting on SDG 16.10.2 serves as an incentive for 
countries to improve their legal regulatory frameworks, their 
implementation and/or their enforcement. In this regard, 
the annual UNESCO survey, which provides a standardised 
approach to monitoring SDG 16.10.2, has proven useful for 
countries in measuring and reporting progress at the national 
level, including in their Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) 
of progress made on the SDGs. This was evident in Côte 
d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Mexico, Sierra Leone, Tunisia and Uruguay, 
which have used the data collected through the survey 
to report on their ATI progress in their VNRs. In this regard, 
this report also presents an analysis of countries’ reporting 
on SDG 16.10.2 in the VNRs since 2019. In 2021, out of 42 
countries that submitted their reviews to the VNR process, 
28 countries (67%) reported on ‘access to information’ . 
While 132 UN Member States have adopted various 
ATI legal guarantees, states that have not adopted such 
guarantees could boost access to information for their 
citizens by considering similar steps. As demonstrated 
by case studies and good practices in this report, for 
countries confronted with the urgent need to recover from 
the pandemic, build public trust, strengthen their institutions, 
improve public service delivery and address corruption, 
access to information can serve as a means to achieve these 
objectives.
With only nine years left to achieve the SDGs by 2030, and 
with global challenges becoming more interconnected, 
the message is clear that access to information should be 
the thread that binds together diverse actions towards 
the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development and beyond. UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Executive summary   I
71.  
BACKGROUND  
AND CONTEXTUNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I   Background  and context
81.1. Access to Information and 
Sustainable Development
Conceptually, ‘public access to information’ refers to the 
presence of an effective system to meet citizens’ rights to 
seek and receive information, particularly that held by or on 
behalf of public authorities. 
Access to information (ATI) has been recognised as a key 
element of sustainable development since the adoption 
of the Rio Declaration in 1992.1 Further in 2015, the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development2 acknowledged access 
to information as a necessary enabling mechanism for 
transparent, accountable and participatory governance, rule 
of law and peaceful societies as epitomised by Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG) number 16: ‘Peace, Justice and 
Strong Institutions’ . Target 16.10 calls for states to “ensure 
public access to information and protect fundamental 
freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and 
international agreements” .
The Human Rights Council in its 2020 resolution on 
freedom of opinion and expression (General Assembly A/
HRC/RES/44/12)3 at its 44th regular session recognises 
that “public authorities should strive to make information 
available, whether the information is proactively published 
electronically or provided upon request...” .
The Windhoek +30 Declaration4 was adopted on 3 May 
2021, during the global celebration event of the World Press 
Freedom Day, affirming the need to uphold information 
as a public good that serves as a shared resource for the 
whole of humanity. Emphasizing the importance of press 
freedom, independence and pluralism to guarantee access to 
information, the Declaration also sets out recommendations 
to secure information as a public good by addressing 
media viability, promoting Internet company transparency 
and enhancing citizens’ media and information literacy 
competencies. 
Within the perspective of the 2030 Agenda, access to 
information is critical for empowering the public to make 
decisions, holding governments accountable, evaluating 
public officials in implementing and monitoring the SDGs, 
and facilitating effective public participation.
1 https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/story/unep-implementing-
principle-10-rio-declaration
2 Adopted in 2015 by all 193 UN member states, the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development (https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/
transformingourworld/publication) is a 15-year plan of action “to end poverty, 
protect the planet and ensure prosperity for all, while strengthening universal 
peace in larger freedom” . 
3 https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3877197?ln=fr
4 https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/windhoek30declaration_wpfd_2021.pdfThis has been well attested to during the COVID-19 
pandemic, marked by a growing public demand for 
information that is accurate, timely and reliable. The need for 
openness, transparency, and accountability has never been 
stronger. Where civic space was shrinking and disinformation 
and misinformation expanding, access to information has 
helped counterbalance the situation, playing its role as 
a tool for transparency, through which the public could 
exercise their right to information. This has facilitated public 
participation and promoted civic engagement in response to 
the crisis. But there are challenges. 
The Latin American Anti-Corruption Network (REAL), for 
instance, has published data on the level of transparency in 
eight countries in the region during the pandemic, including 
within the scope of access to information. 5 Their data show 
that very few countries have periodic and accessible data on 
public spending during the pandemic.6 Securing access to 
such information allows the public to harness the potential of 
data for holding governments accountable. 
In coming out of the pandemic, the role of access 
to information continues to be critical in re-building 
communities and their public institutions. This has been 
made evident in the recent study carried out by UNDP’s Oslo 
Governance Centre and the German Development Institute 
(Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik), which is reported 
on in Chapter 4 of this report. The study underlined the 
role of access to information in COVID-19 recovery, namely, 
social protection, equal opportunities and poverty. The study 
suggested that improved access to information also increases 
awareness of target populations and improves social 
protection programmes.
1.2. UNESCO and the monitoring and 
reporting on SDG Indicator 16.10.2
Standard-setting on monitoring and reporting 
Following the approval of the SDG framework in 2017 by 
the UN General Assembly, UNESCO was designated as the 
custodian agency for Indicator 16.10.2. Under this mandate, 
UNESCO monitors and reports to the UN Secretary-General 
each year on “the number of countries that adopt and 
implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees 
for public access to information” , giving attention to both 
components: “adoption” and “implementation” . 
5 http://redanticorrupcion.com/informes/covid-y-corrupcion/ 
6 https://www.sdg16hub.org/group/southern-voice-undp-sdg-16-trends-and-
emerging-issues/topic/civil-societys-role-promoting
UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Background and context    I
9In the Decision of the Intergovernmental Council of 
UNESCO’s International Programme for the Development 
of Communication (IPDC) on Monitoring and Reporting of 
SDG Indicator 16.10.2, adopted in November 20187, the IPDC 
Council encouraged the IPDC Secretariat, in cooperation with 
the Organization’s Information For All Programme (IFAP), to 
develop a mechanism that could strengthen UNESCO’s work 
as custodian agency for the global monitoring of progress. 
The Council further urged that the mechanism involve and 
support countries in the data collection and reporting on 
SDG Indicator 16.10.2. 
As a response to the Decision, UNESCO and its Institute 
for Statistics (UIS) developed a methodology to help 
measure and report on Indicator 16.10.2. This consists of a 
survey developed in consultation8 with experts, concerned 
organizations, and the IFAP Secretariat. UNESCO believes 
that when countries engage themselves in a self-assessment 
through the survey, they can identify their own gaps in terms 
of implementation of ATI laws, and better strategize for future 
improvements.
The survey was piloted in 2019 in 43 countries that submitted 
the Voluntary National Reviews on SDG progress that year, 
with the findings presented at a side-event during the UN’s 
High-Level Political Forum in July 2019. 
The survey instrument was later refined for a full deployment 
in 2020 and was subsequently further improved for the 
2021 cycle. In this regard, UNESCO conducted an online 
consultation with a group of experts in November 2020 
to propose an upgraded methodology of the survey. 
In collaboration with the International Conference of 
Information Commissioners and the Regional Network of 
Access to Information Practitioners in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (Red de transparencia y acceso ala información, 
RTA), three consultation sessions were organised in February 
2021 to test the updated survey with the participation 
of around 80 representatives from oversight institutions 
responsible for ATI worldwide. 
Following the launch of the survey in April 2021, three 
sessions offering online clinics were also organized to assist 
countries in completing the survey, with a view to avoiding 
errors and ensuring the quality of data. In July 2021, the 
UN’s Inter-Agency and Expert Group on the Sustainable 
Development Goal Indicators (IAEG-SDGs) validated the 
updated metadata for Indicator 16.10.2, which includes the 
use of the survey to collect the data annually.9 
7 https://en.unesco.org/news/ipdc-council-encourages-further-development-
mechanism-monitor-and-report-access-information 
8 https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco-convenes-experts-advance-monitoring-
and-reporting-access-information 
9 In 2019, the IAEG-SDG upgraded Indicator 16.10.2 from Tier II to Tier I —the 
highest level in the classification system developed to rank SDG indicators. Since the pilot phase in 2019, the UNESCO survey has 
brought impact beyond measuring countries’ progress on 
achieving SDG Target 16.10. Many local actors, including ATI 
oversight bodies and civil society actors, have been mobilised 
to network with each other in collecting data for the survey. 
Some countries have also used the information assembled to 
identify areas of improvement. As such, the survey is not only 
contributing to assessing SDG Indicator 16.10.2, but also to 
securing ATI implementation. The utility of the data collection 
on SDG 16.10.2 was also acknowledged by the IPDC Council 
at its 32nd session (November 2020), on the basis that it 
provides evidence-based analysis for the improvement of 
access to information as a factor for sustainable development.
Capacity-building and awareness raising
In the 2018 Decision of the IPDC Council referred to the 
above, the IPDC Secretariat, Council and Bureau were 
encouraged to keep supporting Member States in data 
collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 on access 
to information. Further, in its 2020 decision, the Council 
invited the Bureau to’ continue supporting grassroot projects 
that will help Member States in data collection and reporting 
on SDG indicator 16.10.2, including by strengthening 
monitoring and reporting capacities of oversight bodies 
responsible for ATI. 
In this regard, with the support of various donors to the IPDC, 
UNESCO has been able to facilitate capacity development 
initiatives and awareness raising efforts in several countries, 
such as Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, Indonesia, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Myanmar, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, 
Thailand and Tunisia, as well as in the Latin American region10. 
This line of action has been done through collaboration with 
information commissioners and their networks, such as the 
International Conference of Information Commissioners and 
Red de Transparencia y Acceso a la Informacion.
The IPDC Council, in both the 2018 and 2020 decisions, also 
encouraged countries to monitor progress on ATI, including 
through the Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) system, which 
offers an opportunity to follow-up and review mechanisms 
on SDG 16 (Section 3 of this report further discusses the 
VNRs). In this regard, participating in the UNESCO Survey on 
Public Access to Information has been proven to be useful for 
countries as they can repurpose the data submitted to the 
survey for their VNRs. For instance, Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, 
Mexico, Sierra Leone, Tunisia and Uruguay have used the 
data collected through the survey to also report on their ATI 
progress in their VNRs. 
10 While activities in the Latin and American region were mostly carried out 
through a regional approach, UNESCO is also supporting national initiatives, 
for example in Honduras and in Mexico. UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Background and context  
10UNESCO has also been engaged in various joint efforts with 
other UN entities and civil society. Under the umbrella of 
the Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just 
and Inclusive Societies11, collaboration has been established 
through a series of events and workshops, as well as the 
development of guidelines and resources to support 
countries in their monitoring and reporting on SDG 16. As 
part of the “SDG 16 National Monitoring Initiative” – a project 
on monitoring national progress on Goal 16, an online 
workshop took place in April 2021 for stakeholders in Mexico, 
Moldova and Tunisia. Under the spirit of #OneUN, UNESCO 
also started this year a new collaboration with OHCHR, UNDP , 
UNODC and UNESCAP through a series of regional training 
workshops to measure SDG 16. The first edition of the online 
training was held between April and June 2021 for the 
Latin American region, garnering around 1,600 participants 
from civil society and government institutions. The second 
edition, targeted at national stakeholders in the Asia and 
Pacific region, will be organised between September and 
November 2021. 
The annual celebration of the International Day for Universal 
Access to Information on 28 September constitutes a 
keystone of UNESCO’s awareness raising efforts on access 
to information. The Day was declared by UNESCO’s 38th 
General Conference in 2015. The status of the celebration 
was elevated in October 2019, when the 74th UN General 
Assembly proclaimed the Day at UN level.12 The Day 
continues to provide a platform for UNESCO to discuss key 
findings of data collection on SDG 16.10.2, as well as to 
disseminate takeaways from studies on access to information 
and cross-cutting issues, such as gender and persons with 
disabilities. 
All this momentum has accompanied and reinforced 
concrete steps towards tracking progress on ATI. 
11 The Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just and Inclusive 
Societies (https://www.un-globalalliance.org/) is a coordinating platform for 
Member States, private sector, civil society and UN entities to work together 
towards the achievement of SDG 16. The Alliance is operated by seven 
Member States (Cabo Verde, Mexico, Norway, Qatar, Sierra Leone, Tunisia and 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), three civil society 
organisations (NYU Centre on International Cooperation: The Transparency 
and Accountability Network, and the World Federation of United Nations 
Associations), and three private sector companies (Deloitte Ltd., LexisNexis, and 
White & Case LLP). Its work is supported by a Secretariat co-facilitated by UNDP , 
UNODC, UNESCO, OHCHR, UNHCR, UN Women, and the Global Compact (a 
UN Advisory Group composed of 10 UN agencies, and partners from other 
governments, civil society organisations and private sector actors).
12 https://en.unesco.org/news/proclaims-international-day-universal-access-
information UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Background and context    I
112.  
TRACKING PROGRESS  
ON SDG INDICATOR  
16.10.2 IN 2021UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I   Tracking progress  on SDG Indicator  16.10.2 in 2021
122.1. Global	overview:	Adoption	of	ATI	legal	guarantees
Progress has been recorded in terms of binding laws and policies giving individuals a right to access information held by public 
authorities. As of August 2021, 132 UN Member States have adopted constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for 
public access to information, with at least 22 countries adopting such guarantees since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda in 
2015.13 In 2021, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia joined the list.14
Table 1. UN Member States that have adopted constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to 
information (grouped based on the execution of regional activities by UNESCO)
Europe and North America (50)
1. Albania
2. Armenia
3. Austria
4. Azerbaijan
5. Belarus
6. Belgium
7. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
8. Bulgaria
9. Canada
10. Croatia
11. Cyprus12. Czechia
13. Denmark
14. Estonia
15. Finland
16. France
17. Georgia
18. Germany
19. Greece
20. Hungary
21. Iceland
22. Ireland23. Israel15
24. Italy
25. Latvia
26. Liechtenstein16
27. Lithuania
28. Luxembourg
29. Malta 
30. Monaco
31. Montenegro
32. Netherlands
33. North Macedonia34. Norway
35. Poland
36. Portugal
37. Republic of Moldova
38. Romania
39. Russian Federation
40. San Marino
41. Serbia
42. Slovakia
43. Slovenia44. Spain 
45. Sweden
46. Switzerland
47. Turkey
48. Ukraine
49. United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
50. United States of 
America17
Latin America and the Caribbean (25)
51. Antigua and 
Barbuda
52. Argentina
53. Bahamas
54. Belize 
55. Bolivia (Plurinational 
State of )56. Brazil
57. Chile
58. Colombia
59. Costa Rica
60. Dominican Republic61. Ecuador 
62. El Salvador
63. Guatemala
64. Guyana
65. Honduras
66. Jamaica67. Mexico
68. Nicaragua
69. Panama
70. Paraguay
71. Peru
72. Saint Kitts and Nevis73. Saint Vincent and 
the Grenadines
74. Trinidad and Tobago
75. Uruguay
Asia and the Pacific (27)
76. Afghanistan
77. Australia
78. Bangladesh
79. China
80. Cook Islands
81. Fiji 82. India
83. Indonesia
84. Iran (Islamic 
Republic of )
85. Japan
86. Kazakhstan87. Kyrgyzstan
88. Maldives
89. Mongolia
90. Nepal
91. New Zealand
92. Pakistan 93. Palau
94. Philippines
95. Republic of Korea
96. Sri Lanka
97. Tajikistan98. Thailand 
99. Timor-Leste
100. Uzbekistan
101. Vanuatu
102. Viet Nam
Africa (22)
103. Angola
104. Benin
105. Burkina Faso
106. Côte d’Ivoire107. Ethiopia
108. Ghana
109. Guinea
110. Kenya
111. Liberia112. Malawi
113. Mozambique
114. Niger
115. Nigeria
116. Rwanda117. Seychelles
118. Sierra Leone
119. South Africa
120. South Sudan
121. Togo122. Uganda
123. United Republic of 
Tanzania
124. Zimbabwe
Arab States (8)
125. Jordan
126. Kuwait127. Lebanon
128. Morocco 129. Saudi Arabia
130. Sudan 131. Tunisia
132. Yemen
13 Argentina, Bahamas, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Fiji, Ghana, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malawi, Morocco, Vanuatu, Philippines, Timor-Leste, Saudi Arabia, Saint Kitts 
and Nevis, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Viet Nam, Togo, United Republic of Tanzania.
14 The Gambia also passed the Access to Information Bill in July 2021, yet as of the writing of this report in August 2021, the Bill has yet to be included in the official 
gazette, hence it has not yet included in the list. 
15 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018. 
16 Lichtenstein is not a member of UNESCO.
17 The United States of America withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018. UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021     I
132.2. Reaching	the	furthest	behind	first:	
Inclusion of disability rights in ATI 
guarantees18
…when accessible information and communications 
are not available, a range of persons with different 
disabilities cannot effectively benefit from public 
policies and programmes. ”
Catalina Devandas-Aguilar, Former UN Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons 
with disabilities, the 71st Session of UN General Assembly, 2016. 
The importance of access to information (ATI) as an 
internationally recognised human right for all, including for 
persons with disabilities, has long been acknowledged. 
However, the realisation of this right for those with disabilities 
remains a challenge. 
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, pledging 
to “endeavour to reach the furthest behind first” , calls 
upon countries to ensure the full and equal participation 
of persons with disabilities in all spheres of society and to 
create enabling environments by, for and with persons with 
disabilities, in accordance with the UN Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). 
The CRPD recognises that civil and political rights, including 
the right to information, are a vital prerequisite for persons 
with disabilities to overcome histories of exclusion. First, 
the CPRD discusses equality for persons with disabilities 
in accessing information. Second, it places the right to 
information in the context of disability accessibility.19
In the same spirit, Article 21 explicitly states that “States 
Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that 
persons with disabilities can exercise the right to freedom 
of expression and opinion, including the freedom to seek, 
receive and impart information and ideas on an equal basis 
with others and through all forms of communication of their 
choice […]” .
ATI laws in several countries acknowledge the importance 
of accessibility to information by persons with disabilities. 
Based on an analysis for the 127 countries with ATI laws 
18 Extracted from a study commissioned by UNESCO to independent researcher 
Lida Ayoubi, PhD. For the purpose of this Report, only the most relevant 
findings are presented.
19 CRPD, articles 9(1) and 21(a).in 202020, 37 countries explicitly refer to persons with 
disabilities and their rights, to varying degrees.21 The common 
themes in these legislations relate to placing a request 
for access to information, forms in which access is 
provided, conditions for delivery of accessible formats, 
and provision of further assistance to persons with 
disabilities. With regard to placing a request for access to 
information, 11 countries allow applicants with disabilities 
to submit an oral request where a written one would 
normally be required.22 Additionally, six countries require the 
information provider to assist the person with disabilities in 
submitting the request when their disability prevents them 
from doing so in a manner generally prescribed by the law.23
Of the 11 countries that specifically mention the provision 
of information to persons with disabilities in an accessible 
format, 10 use broad wording that refers to an “alternative 
format” or a similar concept. Of these, three limit the provision 
of alternative formats to conditions such as cost, as well as 
time and copyright law restrictions. One country only refers 
to content accessibility for persons with disabilities when 
information is provided on websites. 
The above figures highlight the challenges for effective 
access to information for persons with disabilities. First and 
foremost, it is evident that the rights of persons with 
disabilities are absent from most ATI legislations. Where 
reference is made to persons with disabilities and accessibility 
of information, the scope of the disabilities covered and the 
rights secured for persons with disabilities are rather limited, 
or not always clear. Furthermore, the research showed that 
effective accessibility criteria are missing from many 
existing legislative frameworks, or that their implementation 
is hindered by factors such as inadequate awareness and 
training around the rights of persons with disabilities and 
insufficient funding. Ignoring the issues of cost or imposing 
restrictive conditions on access for persons with disabilities 
are amongst the challenges highlighted when assessing 
the existing ATI legislation. Finally, the lack of appeal and 
oversight mechanisms and meaningful data on the state of 
accessibility for persons with disabilities also act as obstacles 
for provision of satisfactory information accessibility.
20 As recorded by UNESCO in 2020. 
21 These countries are Afghanistan, Antigua, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, India, 
Ireland, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Maldives, Mexico, Montenegro, 
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leon, Saint Kitts and Nevis, 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, 
Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, Vanuatu, and Vietnam.
22 These countries are Afghanistan, Antigua, Azerbaijan, Ethiopia, Ghana, 
Maldives, Saint Kitts and Nevis, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. 
23 These countries are Kenya, Liberia, Pakistan, Seychelles, Ukraine, and Vietnam.UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021   
14Shortfalls of national provisions on ATI and 
disability issues
(Based on an assessment of 37 national legislation with provisions 
on the rights of persons with disabilities)
1. Reference to the rights of persons with disabilities is vague 
and brief. 
2. The legislation does not provide a sufficiently 
comprehensive application of accessibility criteria to all 
government information. 
3. The legislation does not clarify the scope of disabilities subject 
to the Act or is restrictive regarding the disabilities covered. 
4. The legislation only refers to the submission of a request for 
access to information for persons with disabilities but not 
the provision of such access. 
5. The legislation only covers direct requests for information 
by persons with disabilities without covering proactive 
disclosure. 
6. The legislation does not cover the issue of the cost of 
making information accessible to persons with disabilities. 
7. The legislation imposes restrictive conditions on provision 
of access to information for persons with disabilities. 
8. The legislation does not provide for appeal and oversight 
mechanisms in relation to access to information for persons 
with disabilities. 
Monitoring of Indicator 16.10.2 provides an opportunity for 
countries and other concerned stakeholders to improve 
actual implementation of the provisions of normative 
instruments such as the CRPD. Countries should consider 
steps towards an inclusive and comprehensive 
legislative framework containing minimum mandatory 
accessibility standards that ensure access to information 
for persons with disabilities, without discrimination based on 
type of disability, geographical location, financial means, and 
language capabilities, among other factors. 
2.3. Highlights from 2021 UNESCO 
Survey on Public Access to Information 
2.3.1. Respondents and scores: There is a growing interest in 
reporting progress on ‘Access to Information’, and countries 
with dedicated oversight institutions perform better
In 2021, UNESCO invited all UN Member States, including 
associated territories, to participate in the survey based upon 
on SDG Indicator 16.10.2. The survey took place between 
April and June 2021. As many as 102 countries and territories, 
responded to the survey.24 
24 The four territories participating in the survey were Gibraltar, Isle of Man, Jersey 
and Cayman Islands. Gibraltar and Cayman Islands are non-self-governing 
territories administrated by the United Kingdom; The Isle of Man and Jersey are 
internally self-governing dependencies of the British Crown, United Kingdom. Figure 1. Number of countries and territories that participated 
in UNESCO survey exercise from 2019-2021
2021 2020 20194 territories
65 countries4 territories
98 countries
43*69102
*  Pilot countries only: UN Member States that presented VNR reports at the 
2019 UN HLPF
This year, UNESCO reduced the number of questions and 
introduced a scoring system in the survey’s methodology, 
as per suggestions from the UN’s IAEG-SDGs. The survey 
comprises 8 questions25, each value between 0 and 2. Upon 
the completion of the survey, a country can get a total score 
of 0-9, enabling it to track progress over time. The total score of 
each country only contributes to global analysis, and is not 
assigned to any level category (e.g.: low, medium, or high). 
Out of 79 countries and territories with ATI oversight 
institutions, 70% of them scored 7 and above. Meanwhile, 
12 countries without ATI oversight institutions scored 
between 1 and 7.2.26 This finding suggested that countries 
that have a specialised ATI oversight body are likely to 
perform better than those without. 
In order to help establish a reporting link for SDG 16.10.2 at 
the national level, UNESCO sent the survey invitation this 
year to both the central oversight institutions responsible 
for access to information (e.g., information commission/er; 
data protection or privacy commission/er; national human 
25 The questions of the survey were based on “Principles of Access to 
Information” , which were synthesized from existing frameworks and 
documents recognised internationally. For the purpose of this survey, the 
principles of relevance are as follows: (a) Legal frameworks for Access to 
Information; (b) Limited exemptions; (c) Oversight mechanism; (d) Appeals 
mechanism; (e) Record keeping and reporting. It is worth noting that while 
this survey is intended for the central ATI oversight institutions, there is another 
reporting instrument developed by UNESCO to collect data from public 
bodies (Departments/ Ministries/ Agencies), which also looks at the ‘Proactive 
Disclosure’ element, among other things. ‘Proactive Disclosure’ is not covered 
by the survey presented in this report, as it relates more to the performance 
of the public bodies, not the ATI oversight institutions. This other reporting 
instrument for the public bodies is of relevance to countries that are interested 
in having a more in-depth assessment on their ATI implementation.
26 These data need to be taken with caution, as the two countries with the score 
of 5.2 and 7.2 first reported their ATI guarantees did not specify the need for 
ATI oversight institutions, but later reported some activities done by these 
oversight institutions, which demonstrated an inconsistency. UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021     I
15rights institution; Ombuds institution; department/ ministry/ 
agency) and national SDG focal points (usually the national 
statistics offices). In some countries, the invitation was sent to 
only one of these entities, due the absence of one or another. 
UNESCO also joined forces with networks of oversight 
institutions responsible for access to information, such as the 
International Conference of Information Commissioners, the 
International Ombudsman Institute and Red de Transparencia 
y Acceso a la Información (regional Latin American network 
of information commissioners) to increase participation of 
countries in the survey. 
The exercise revealed that out of the 102 countries and 
territories that responded to the survey, 82 of them 
are members of such networks. This demonstrates the 
important role of such networks in advocating for SDG 
monitoring and reporting, as well as mobilising their 
members in taking part in global-wide activities related to 
the SDGs. 
Although the survey also observed some issues related to 
the quality of responses (which are discussed in the next 
sub-section), UNESCO noted that such coalition-building 
is key for addressing gaps in the SDG monitoring and 
reporting. These networks could serve as platforms, through 
which SDG monitoring and reporting processes could be 
improved over time. 
2.3.2. Legal frameworks on Access to Information: National 
regulation systems are increasingly conducive to public 
access to information
Out of the 102 countries and territories that responded to the 
survey, 89% (91)27 indicated to have constitutional, statutory 
and/or policy guarantees for ATI. Five countries indicated an 
absence of ATI guarantees, while six others reported that they 
are ‘in progress’ in adopting such guarantees.
Among those responding countries that have ATI legal 
guarantees, 11 adopted such guarantees since the adoption 
of the 2030 Agenda in 2015 (Argentina, Costa Rica, Cyprus, 
27 Responding countries and territories by UNESCO’s groupings: (a) Africa: Benin; 
Botswana; Côte d’Ivoire; Equatorial Guinea; Ethiopia; Kenya; Liberia; Sierra 
Leone; South Africa; South Sudan; United Republic of Tanzania; (b) Arab States: 
Jordan; Kuwait; Morocco; Tunisia; (c) Asia and the Pacific: Afghanistan; Australia; 
Bangladesh; Cambodia; Cook Islands; Indonesia; Iran (Islamic Republic of ); 
Japan; Kazakhstan; Mongolia; Nepal; Pakistan; Philippines; Republic of Korea; 
Sri Lanka; Thailand; Vanuatu; (c) Europe and North America: Albania; Austria; 
Azerbaijan; Belarus; Belgium; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Bulgaria; Canada; 
Croatia; Cyprus; Czechia; Denmark; Estonia; France; Georgia; Germany; Gibraltar; 
Hungary; Ireland; Isle of Man; Israel; Italy; Jersey; Lithuania; Luxembourg; Malta; 
Montenegro; North Macedonia; Norway; Republic of Moldova; Romania; 
Serbia; Slovakia; Slovenia; Spain; Switzerland; Turkey; Ukraine; United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; United States of America; (d) Latin 
America and the Caribbean: Argentina; Belize; Bolivia (Plurinational State of ); 
Brazil; Cayman Islands; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Cuba; Dominican Republic; 
Ecuador; El Salvador; Guatemala; Honduras; Mexico; Panama; Paraguay; 
Peru; Uruguay. *Note: Israel and the United States of America withdrew from 
UNESCO on 31 December 2018. Kenya, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Morocco, Philippines, Sri Lanka, 
United Republic of Tanzania, and Vanuatu). 
While constitutional guarantees may exist in these countries, 
the process of adopting statutory guarantees for public access 
to information includes consultations with the executive and 
legislative branches of government and civil society. 
Out of the 91 countries and territories with ATI guarantees, 
71% (65) reported that their respective guarantee specifies 
the need for public bodies (Ministry/Agency/Department) to 
appoint public information officers or a specific unit to 
handle requests for information by the public. In 62 countries, 
this provision applies to ‘all public bodies’ , while it applies 
only to ‘some public bodies’ in three countries. An in-depth 
assessment is needed on whether this requirement is realised 
in reality, but nevertheless, this finding shows a positive 
trend towards acknowledging the importance of a dedicated 
arrangement within public bodies to deal with ATI, which in 
itself sets the foundation for both proactive and reactive 
disclosure. Since such a dedicated arrangement is ideally 
tasked with record  keeping and reporting, this would also 
greatly contribute to the monitoring on ATI implementation.
2.3.3. Limited scope of exemption: Most permissible 
exemptions are explicitly mentioned in ATI guarantees, but 
disaggregated data on refusals on this basis is still lacking 
Exemptions allow the withholding of certain categories 
of information. Standards for exemptions mean that any 
such withholding must be based on narrow, proportionate, 
necessary and clearly defined limitations. Exemptions should 
apply only where there is a risk of substantial harm to a 
protected interest (as per the list in Figure 2 below), and 
where the harm is greater than the overall public interest 
in having access to the information. These exemptions are 
sometimes cited in relation to requests for information, and 
also for refusals in relation to declined initial requests. 
Out of the 91 responding countries and territories with 
ATI guarantees, 81% (83) reported that their respective 
ATI legal guarantee explicitly mentions permissible 
exemptions that are elaborated in well-defined categories 
whereby requests for information may be legally denied. The 
figure below shows the proportion of permissible exemptions 
in ATI legal guarantees, as indicated by the respondents.UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021   
16Figure 2. Permissible exemptions in ATI legal guarantees
Legitimate policy making
and other operations of
public bodiesConservation of
the environmentFair administration
of justice and legal
advice privilegeManagement
of the economyLegitimate commercial 
and other economic
interestsPrivacyThe prevention,
investigation and
prosecution of
legal wrongsPublic health and safetyInternational relationsNational security 86,8%
67,0%
62,6%
69,2%
84,6%
74,7%
38,5%
58,2%
31,9%
48,4%
Going further, ATI oversight institutions in 24 out of 
40 countries and territories that reported data on ‘ATI requests’ 
in 2020 reported that they kept disaggregated data on the 
reasons for non-disclosure and partial disclosure on the basis 
of the legitimate exemptions. As it relates to data on ‘Appeals’ 
in 2020, 29 out of 51 respondents reported to do so. Figure 3. Countries that keep disaggregated data for 
non-disclosure and partial disclosure on the basis of the 
permissible exemptions in 2020
24
60%16
40%
29
57%22
43%(ATI Requests)
(Appeals)
● Countries keeping disaggregated data
● Countries not keeping disaggregated data
2.3.4. Oversight mechanism: Dedicated ATI oversight 
institutions are well established in most countries, but not 
all monitor implementation of ATI guarantees and enforce 
its compliance
An oversight institution refers to the institution charged with 
ensuring the process of supervision, monitoring, evaluation 
of performance and review, in order to ensure compliance 
with laws, regulations and policies. It therefore ensures 
accountability for the implementation of ATI. The same body 
or another may also do appeals, although hearing appeals 
is a distinct function from oversight and is sometimes done 
by a separate body. This is why in some countries, there 
exists more than one oversight institution, depending on the 
different tasks performed.
Out of the 91 responding countries and territories with ATI 
guarantees, 87% (79) reported that their respective ATI 
legal guarantee specifies the need of a dedicated oversight 
institution(s). Information Commission/er is the most 
common type (34), followed with a converged body that 
combines data/privacy protection and ATI (18); Ombuds 
institution (17) and Department/ Ministry/ Agency (17); Other UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021     I
17(11)28; Data protection or privacy commission/er (9); and 
Human Rights Commission (3).29 In the majority of countries 
and territories, these institutions operate at the national level, 
with only few of them indicating the existence at the sub-
national level. 
Figure 4. Types of oversight institution
OtherSub-nationalNationalDepartment/
Ministry/ AgencySub-nationalNationalOmbuds institutionSub-nationalNationalHuman rights
commissionSub-nationalNationalConverged body of
data/privacy
protection & ATISub-nationalNationalData protection or
privacy
commission/erSub-nationalNationalInformation
commission/er 34
34
8
9
9
0
18
17
5
3
3
0
17
15
112
17
17
2
28 Some countries and territories that opted for ‘Other’ indicated they have 
more than one institution that carry out the oversight mechanism, which 
cannot be precisely put under any of the survey’s categories. Italy, for instance, 
mentioned “Ombudsman for local administration and Commission for the 
access to public document-Public Administration Government Department, 
while Austria noted “Administrative Courts, Highest Administrative Court, 
Constitutional Court, Ombudsman Board” . Peru referred ‘Other’ to “la Autoridad 
Nacional de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información Pública (ANTAIP) and el 
Tribunal de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información Pública (TTAIP) – both of 
which are part of the organic structure of the Ministry of Justice and Human 
Rights. Meanwhile, Bulgaria indicated “Administrative Reform Council”; 
France “Conseil d’Etat, juridictions administratives”; Serbia “Commissioner for 
Information of Public Importance and Personal Data protection”; Turkey “The 
Review Board of Access to Information”; and Uruguay “Unidad de Acceso a la 
Información Pública (UAIP). 
29 For this question, a country could choose one or more types, as applicable.When it comes to the roles of the ATI oversight institutions 
as mandated by the guarantees, the majority of countries 
and territories responded ‘Monitoring of ATI implementation’ 
(74), followed with ‘Appeals’ (65); ‘Oversight’ (63); ‘Enforcement 
of compliance with ATI legal guarantee’ (55) and ‘Mediation’ 
(32).30 ‘Mediation’ seems like the most uncommon role, but 
it is interesting to note that 50% of respondents in Africa (7 
out of 15) and Latin America and the Caribbean (10 out of 
20) reported on this role, indicating a small tendency in these 
regions to propose an alternative solution to resolve a dispute 
before proceeding to any formal procedure.
Figure 5. Roles of ATI oversight institutions as mandated by 
the legal guarantees
MediationEnforcement of
compliance with
ATI legal guaranteeOversightAppealsMonitoring of
ATI implementation 74
65
63
55
32
The independence of the oversight institution is essential to 
it playing an effective role. Such independence can at least be 
observed from the appointment process of the head of the 
oversight institution; how the institution is financed, and to 
whom it directly reports about its activities. 
The survey revealed that out of the 91 responding countries 
and territories with ATI laws, the majority of them (44) 
indicated that the head of the ATI oversight institution 
is appointed by the ‘Executive’ .31 The ‘Legislative’ branch is the 
second most answered (27), followed with ‘Other’ (16) and 
‘Judiciary’ (1). 
On the approval of the budget for the ATI oversight 
institution, the ‘Legislative’ branch is the most answered 
(47) and followed with ‘Executive (34). Meanwhile, although 
seven countries indicated ‘Other’ in their responses, further 
observation found that some of the explanation provided 
were either not sufficient or raised other questions.32 
30 For this question, respondents could choose one or more types, as applicable. 
It is worth noting that although the survey uses the term ‘oversight institution’ 
to cover different entities responsible for ATI, some countries and territories in 
reality put a more specific distinction between an ‘oversight institution’ and a 
‘supervisory institution’ , hence they did not choose the ‘oversight’ role in their 
answer to this question.
31 For this question, respondents could choose one or more branches of 
government, as applicable.
32 One of the countries, for instance, mentioned “the Parliament, based on 
proposal from the Ministry” .UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021   
18On the question about to whom the ATI oversight 
institution directly reports about its activities, the 
‘Legislative’ branch is the most answered (55) and followed 
with ‘Executive (30). Only one country answered ‘Judiciary’ , 
while 13 indicated ‘Other’ . For the latter, some answered that 
they directly report to “the public” , while others explained 
they do not report to any government branches. Meanwhile 
some countries either put “president” , a specific “ministry” or 
“parliament” under ‘Other’ , although these can actually be 
regarded either as ‘Executive’ or ‘Legislative’ although this 
assessment has not been used to change the data for the 
statistics provided in this report. 
Figure 6. Appointment, financing and reporting
OtherJudiciaryLegislativeExecutiveWho appointed the head of ATI oversight institution
44
27
161
OtherJudiciaryLegislativeExecutiveWho approved the budget of ATI oversight institution
34
47
160
OtherJudiciaryLegislativeExecutiveTo whom ATI oversight institution directly reports
30
55
131
On the question about the activities performed by the 
dedicated ATI oversight institutions in 2020, publishing 
an annual report was reported by 78 countries and territories. 
The same number of respondents also reported that they 
sensitised the public on Access to Information. The third 
activity implemented by ATI oversight institutions was 
providing a guidance to officials from public bodies (72), 
followed by keeping statistics on request and appeals (70) 
and requesting public bodies to keep statistics on their 
activities and decisions. 
However, there is a caveat here. Some countries and 
territories that reported on keeping statistics did not provide 
further data to UNESCO in their response to the following questions. On the contrary, few others reported that they did 
not keep statistics, but nevertheless still provided data. This 
reflects some inconsistencies in record-keeping practices. 
Figure 7. Activities of ATI oversight institutions in 2020
Publish an Annual Report
78
13 NOYES
Request public bodies to keep statistics of their activities & decisions
NOYES 50
40
Provide implementation guidance and/or 
oﬀer training to oﬃcials from public bodies
NOYES 72
19
Raise public awareness
NOYES 78
13
Keep statistics on requests and/or appeals
NOYES 70
21
Other kinds of additional activities are mentioned 
by respondents. These initiatives can also be considered 
good practices, beyond the elementary prerogatives of ATI 
oversight institutions. Here is non-exhaustive list as reported 
in the survey responses: 
 #Monitoring the State’s compliance with international 
treaty obligations related to Access to information;
 #Monitoring and enforcing compliance with proactive 
disclosure of information, records management and 
the recruitment of public information officers by public 
bodies;
 #Ensuring an annual audit of public bodies; 
 #Awarding prizes to ATI requestors and information 
providers; 
 #Coordinating with NGOs and INGOs on ATI-related 
activities;
 #Keeping and making available online the comprehensive 
list of public bodies;
 #Protecting whistle-blowers.UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021     I
19It remains crucial to assess, both qualitatively and 
quantitatively, the implementation of this right. One indicator 
that can help monitor this effectiveness is the availability of 
data on the number of requests received and how they 
were treated.
Out of the 91 countries and territories with ATI laws, only 
44% (40) had data in 2020 on the number of requests for 
information received. The remaining 56% (51) only had data 
from either 2018 or 2019, or no data at all. Of the latter, it 
is important to note that some did report having a data 
collection mechanism. The low number of data availability in 
2020 might indicate some difficulties faced by public bodies 
to treat and follow up ATI requests during the pandemic. 
From the data available in 2020 as reported by the 40 
countries and territories, the majority of ATI requests were 
granted (75% of cases) and only 13% were denied, with the 
remainder being dismissed as ineligible33 (8%) and pending 
(4%). This positive trend indicates the effectiveness of these 
countries and territories in implementing ATI guarantees. 
However, it is worth noting that some countries recorded 
gaps in terms of the number of total requests received and 
their breakdowns in relation to UNESCO’s categories of 
decision. In this case, some countries explained that they 
adopted different manners in treating the requests. For 
instance, requests made by robots and those withdrawn by 
the requestors were not included in their follow-up systems, 
as was the case for requests transferred to sub-national level. 
In some other instances, the cases that were treated in 2020 
were actually carried over from the previous year(s). This 
resulted in differences between the total number of decisions 
made and the total number of requests received.
Figure 8. Decisions taken on ATI requests in 2020
75%8%
13%4%
● Granted  ● Denied  ● Dismissed as ineligible  ● Pending
33 In some countries and territories, a request for information could not be 
upheld due to reasons other than “legal exemptions/ exceptions” . This can 
therefore be categorised as “Dismissed as ineligible” , and could include 
the following: incomplete applications; vexatious or repeated requests; 
information not in possession; information already in the public domain; 
requests submitted to entities other than public bodies or other bodies as 
permissible by law.2.3.5. Appeals mechanism: Record-keeping mechanisms 
exist in most countries, but much needs to be done to keep 
the data updated for reporting purposes 
An appeal is an application for a decision (or lack of a 
decision), which normally involves a request to reconsider 
failures by duty-bearers to provide information. For the 
purpose of this survey, statistics on appeals do not include 
those that were decided by courts.
Out of the 102 countries and territories, only 57% (52) had 
data in 2020 on requests for information received. The 
remaining 43% (39) only had data from either 2018 or 2019, 
or no data at all. Of the latter, it is important to note that 
some did report having a data collection mechanism. The 
low figure in 2020 could be due to the COVID-19 context, 
where a number of countries temporarily suspended existing 
ATI guarantees, limiting the ATI oversight institutions in 
performing their duties.
From the data available in 2020 as reported by the 52 
countries and territories, the majority of requests were 
granted (48% of cases) and only 15% were denied, with the 
rest being dismissed as ineligible (15%) and pending (22%). 
However, it is worth noting that some countries recorded 
gaps in terms of the number of total appeals received and 
their breakdowns based on UNESCO’s categories of decision. 
In this case, some countries and territories explained that 
the cases that were treated in 2020 were actually pending 
cases carried over from the previous year(s). This resulted in 
differences between the total number of decisions made and 
the total number of appeals received.
Figure 9. Decisions taken on Appeals in 2020
48%
15%15%22%
● Granted  ● Denied  ● Dismissed as ineligible  ● PendingUNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Tracking progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 in 2021   
203.  
ATI REPORTING IN 
VOLUNTARY NATIONAL	
REVIEWSUNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I   ATI reporting in Voluntary National Reviews
22The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development encourages 
countries to “conduct regular and inclusive reviews of progress 
at the national and sub-national levels, which are country-led 
and country-driven” . In this regard, Voluntary National Reviews 
(VNRs)34 serve as a follow-up and review mechanism through 
which countries assess and present progress made in achieving 
the SDGs. Countries present the VNRs, on a voluntary basis, 
at the UN High-level Political Forum (HLPF) on Sustainable 
Development, an annual meeting under the auspices of the 
UN’s Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).35 
In 2021, SDG 16 was again subjected to a detailed review. 
Out of 42 countries that submitted their reviews, 28 
countries (67%) reported on ‘access to information’ .36 Of 
these 42 reporting countries, 29 have a specific ATI law on 
public access to information. 
This represents an increase from 2020, where 18 out of 47 VNR 
countries (38.3%) addressed ‘access to information’ in their 
reports. However, it is worth noting that no specific goals were 
under a detailed review last year. Meanwhile in 2019, when SDG 
16 was part of a detail for review for the first time, 28 of the 47 
VNR countries (59.5%) reported on ‘access to information’ . 
Figure 10. Countries that reported on SDG 16.10.2 in VNRs 
from 2019 to 2021 
(Reports by Bahamas and Guatemala are not assessed due to their unavailability on 
the VNR Database as of August 2021) 
51914
12
17
● Europe & North America  ● Latin America & the Caribbean
● Asia & the Pacific  ● Arab States  ● Africa
One of the countries that reported on SDG 16.10.2 in 2021 is 
Indonesia, who also reported on the performance of its ATI 
oversight institution.37 In the context of COVID-19, the country 
reported on CSOs’ monitoring with regards how information 
on health protocols is available, although only as it relates to 
education and public transport. Indonesia also acknowledged 
that the public information and communication management 
34 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/vnrs/ 
35 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/hlpf 
36 VNR reports of Bahamas and Guatemala are not yet available for analysis 
during the writing of this report in August 2021.
37 P . 298-301 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/
documents/280892021_VNR_Report_Indonesia.pdf by the ministry/agency or local government was not well 
integrated during the pandemic. To improve the situation, in 
the Government’s Work Plan (RKP) of 2021, the Government 
said it will strengthen socialization and information 
dissemination programs that are equal and fair regarding 
COVID-19 development, handling, and recovery. Recognizing 
the need to improve public access to information during 
emergencies, Indonesia also incorporated into its Medium-
Term Development Plan of 2020-2024 several strategies to 
improve the quality of public information disclosure.
Another country that provided in-depth progress on 
ATI is Uruguay.38 It reported some actions taken by its 
oversight institution, la Unidad de Acceso a la Información 
Pública (UAIP), such as the establishment of the National 
Index of Transparency and Access to Information that 
measures the level of compliance of public authorities that 
are under obligation to implement ATI legal frameworks. 
UAIP also reported on its Active Transparency audits and 
the development of the Gender and Right of Access to 
Public Information Action Plan (2020-2023), which is part 
of a regional project to incorporate the gender approach 
into transparency and ATI policies. The country also 
introduced the Plan of Municipal Transparency to promote a 
transparency management model at the local government 
level. With regard to COVID-19 and the health sector, the 
government shared some progress related to proactive 
disclosure through a centralised website, as well as the 
implementation of an inclusive public health policy for 
persons with disabilities that guarantees the accessibility of all 
published information, including the different formats, text, 
simple audio and sign language.
Sierra Leone and Tunisia also reported on SDG 16.10.2, 
highlighting the performance of their ATI oversight 
bodies. Sierra Leone reported on its Proactive Disclosure of 
Information scheme and its participation in the UNESCO 
survey on SDG 16.10.2 since 2019.39 Tunisia reported a 
growing interest of the public to exercise the right to 
information, as evidenced from the high number of appeals 
processed by l’Instance Nationale d’Accès à l’Information 
(INAI) since its creation.40
Meanwhile, Namibia reported its progress in the drafting 
an Access to Information Bill, which was tabled for the first 
time in Parliament in 2020. The country mentioned that the 
bill is envisaged to give citizens greater access to information 
and is hoped to be passed before the end of the 2021/2022 
financial year.41
38 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/283682021_
VNR_Report_Uruguay.pdf
39 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/279542021_
VNR_Report_Sierra_Leone.pdf
40 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/279442021_
VNR_Report_Tunisia.pdf
41 P . 77 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/279462021_
VNR_Report_Namibia.pdfUNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
ATI reporting in Voluntary National Reviews   I
23In the past years, UNESCO has also noted that although some countries have not yet adopted a specific ATI law for public 
access to information, they still reported progress on ATI in other contexts. Cameroon, for instance, saw the value of access to 
information in promoting social inclusion of vulnerable people.42 The United Arab Emirates presented Access to Information 
as an important force in increasing the efficiency of healthcare providers and as what is “needed for planning and decision-
making” . 43 
Table 3. SDG 16.10.2 Reporting in the VNRs (2019-2021)
Country Y ear of 
VNRsAdopted a specific ATI 
law for public access to 
informationReported on “Adoption of 
ATI guarantees”Reported on “ATI 
Implementation”*
Afghanistan 2021  
Algeria 2019  
Antigua and Barbuda 2021  Marked in a dashboard as making progress, but 
without any details 
Argentina 2020   
Austria 2020   
Azerbaijan 2019
2021 =
 
Bangladesh 2020   
Bhutan 2021 
Bulgaria 2020  
Cabo Verde 2021 **
Cameroon 2019 *
Chile 2019   
Colombia 2021   
Congo (Republic of the) 2019  *
Côte d’Ivoire 2019   
Croatia 2019   
Cuba 2021 *** 
Czechia 2021  
Denmark 2021  
Dominican Republic 2021  
Ecuador 2020   
Gambia 2020  
Ghana 2019  
Guyana 2019   
Iceland 2019  
Indonesia 2019
2021 =
=

Israel442019   
Japan 2021  
Kenya 2020  
Kuwait 2019 
Kyrgyzstan 2020  
Lesotho 2019  *
42 P . 80 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/24180CAMEROON_Rapport_VNR_0507_2019.pdf 
43 P . 60 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/20161UAE_SDGs_Report_Full_English.pdf
44 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  ATI reporting in Voluntary National Reviews 
24Madagascar 2021
Malawi 2020   
Malaysia 2021 
Marshall Islands 2021 **
Mauritius 2019 *
Mexico 2021  
Micronesia (Federated States of ) 2020  *
Mongolia 2019  
Morocco 2020   
Namibia 2021 
New Zealand 2019   
Nicaragua 2021  
Norway 2021  
Palau 2019  
Panama 2020 
Papua New Guinea 2020  
Paraguay 2021  
Peru 2020 
Philippines 2019  
Qatar 2021 Marked as making progress, but without any details
Republic of Moldova 2020  
Rwanda 2019  
San Marino 2021  
Seychelles 2020   
Sierra Leone 2021   
South Africa 2019   
Spain 2021   
Sweden 2021  
Thailand 2021  **
Timor-Leste 2019   *
Tunisia 2019
2021 =
 
Turkey 2019   
United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland2019   
United Republic of Tanzania 2019  
Uruguay 2021   
Vanuatu 2019   
Zambia 2020 
Zimbabwe 2021   
* For the purpose of this report, implementation here refers to either implementation of ATI legal guarantees or implementation of access to information in a broader view, 
including by countries that have not adopted an ATI guarantee. However, this report does not include any review on SDG 9.C which focuses on access to ICT by measuring the 
“proportion of population covered by a mobile network, by technology” . 
** The implementation aspect reported by these countries is more related to ‘access to media and ICT’ , and other human-rights issues, rather than ‘access to information held by 
public authorities’ as inscribed in SDG 16.10.2
*** Reported on the Constitution guaranteeing ATIUNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
ATI reporting in Voluntary National Reviews   I
254.  
USING ACCESS TO 
INFORMATION TO ADVANCE 
THE SDGS: CASE STUDIES 
AND GOOD	PRACTICESUNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I   Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices
264.1. SDG 16 interlinkages: the role of 
Access to Information in COVID-19 
recovery45 
The research indicates that increased accountability, 
greater participation and inclusion, and increased 
transparency have positive effects on social 
protection, equal opportunities and the eradication of 
poverty.
45  Extracted from the study “SDG 16 Interlinkages: How does progress on SDG 
16 affect progress on other SDGs?” by UNDP’s Oslo Governance Centre and 
German Development Institute/ Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik 
(DIE): https://www.sdg16hub.org/topic/sdg-16-interlinkages-summary-
findings There is strong evidence that progress on key aspects 
of SDG 16 (namely, transparency, accountability, and 
participation and inclusion) has enabling effects on 
aspects of SDG 1 and SDG 10 that are critical for 
COVID-19 recovery, namely, social protection, equal 
opportunities, and the eradication poverty. 
Such interlinkages were studied by UNDP’s Oslo Governance 
Centre (OGC) and the German Development Institute 
(DIE) between December 2020 and June 2021 through a 
systematic literature review of academic papers since 2015. 
In the context of the study, ‘SDG 16 interlinkages’ refer to the 
potential of SDG 16 (Peace, Justice and Inclusion) to help or 
hinder progress on other SDGs (SDG 16 → other SDGs).
Figure 11: Approach to prepare systematic literature review on ‘SDG 16 Interlinkages’ – selecting key aspects of SDG 16 (Entry 
Level) to examine their effects on key aspects of SDG 1 and SDG 10 (Impact Level). 
Entry  
Points
Indirect 
Impacts/ OutcomesIMPACT CLUSTER A:  
Reduced Poverty 
Reduce extreme and relative poverty (1.1, 1.2); 
ensure income growth of bottom 40% (10.1)ENTRY CLUSTER 3:  
Increased Transparency
Transparent institutions (16.6); access to 
information (16.10); anti-corruption (16.5)ENTRY CLUSTER 2:  
Increased Participation and Inclusion
Inclusive, participatory decision 
making (16.7); legal identify (16.9)
Direct 
Impacts/ 
PathwaysENTRY CLUSTER 1:  
Increased Accountability
 Accountable institutions (16.6)
IMPACT CLUSTER C:  
Increased Equal Opportunity
Ensure equal rights to economic resources (1.4); 
social, economic inclusion (10.2); equal 
opportunity through elimination of 
discriminatory laws policies and practices (10.3)IMPACT CLUSTER B:  
Increased Social Protection
Adoption of fiscal, wage and social 
protection policies (1.3, 10.4); improve access 
to basic services (1.4); reduce vulnerability to 
economic and social shocks (1.5)
Source: UNDP OGCUNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices   I
27The review focused on links between key aspects of SDG 
16 on the one hand (‘Entry Level’) and key aspects of SDG 1 
(poverty reduction) and 10 (reducing inequality) on the other 
(‘Impact Level’). With this approach, a Web of Science query 
yielded 426 academic papers. Through screening, 60 papers 
were identified as most relevant for in-depth analysis. The review found over 100 relevant interlinkages, grouped 
under three SDG 16 themes: Accountability (SDG Indicator 
16.6); Participation and Inclusion (SDG Indicators 16.7 and 
16.9); and Transparency (SDG 16.6 and 16.10). 
Figure 12: Reinforcing Feedback Loop R1 ‘Raising Awareness’
R1Citizen 
EngagementEducated 
Population
Access to Basic 
ServicesA.  
REDUCED 
POVERTY
B. 
INCREASED 
SOCIAL 
PROTECTION
Equitable 
Spending 
on Social 
ServicesAwareness 
of 
PopulationAccess to 
InformationAccess to 
InformationDigitization
Government 
Prioritization of 
Social Spending
Source: UNDP OGC
As seen above, ‘Access to Information’ falls under the 
theme Transparency. Of the 60 reviewed papers, 20, 
covering evidence from more than 145 countries, identified 
evidence that increased transparency has positive effects 
on SDG 1 and SDG 10. A key focus for the studies related to 
the relationship between corruption and inequality and 
poverty  include:
 #Corruption creates a biased tax system and supports tax 
evasion, which reduces revenue and undermines the 
capacity of governments to fairly redistribute wealth 
and to spend on social services, which would otherwise reduce poverty. Conversely, inequality motivates corrupt 
behaviour and fosters an environment in which the 
rich are more able to pay bribes. Enhancing contract 
enforcement and economic and property rights can help 
to control corruption and ensure fairer distribution. 
 #Increased transparency in governance and the 
control of corruption are crucial for inclusive financial 
development, which, in turn, reduces income 
inequality. If corruption is controlled while domestic 
credit and finance increase, then income inequality will 
decrease. UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices 
28 #Corruption is less likely to occur when the likelihood of 
being caught and punished is relatively high; this largely 
depends on financial transparency, oversight, 
regulation and enforcement, and access to 
information. Factors such as education and awareness, 
an independent media and higher salaries also inhibit 
corruption. 
 #Controlling corruption results in greater access to 
health and education services. Increasing access to 
information also increases awareness of target 
populations and improves social protection 
programmes.
The review also mapped some causal pathways and feedback 
loops between the studied SDGs. The feedback loops (s) 
are important for identifying key entry points, interventions 
and accelerators that can deliver (or undermine) desirable 
outcomes. Below is one such feedback loop which relates to 
‘Access to Information’ .
The present research findings may be useful as they 
provide policymakers with facts to argue that investing 
in achieving SDG 16 will determine how societies cope 
with the devastating consequences of the pandemic 
and other current and future crises. More specifically, the 
findings indicate that, when policymakers do invest 
in accountability, participation and transparency, 
their interventions on social protection, poverty 
reduction and reducing inequalities are more effective. 
Understanding which aspects of SDG 16 are particularly 
enabling helps policymakers focus their efforts and 
budgets. The findings flag interlinkages that are enabling in 
many countries. They need to be verified in a given context 
and can then be used to prioritize policies and funding 
to implement them. At a time when time and money are 
essential to saving lives and rebuilding livelihoods, this 
information is more critical than ever.4.2. Shaping	the	way	political	systems	
work:	Access	to	Information	for	
inclusive,	effective	and	accountable	
institutions46
There were stark differences in the average levels of 
Checks on Government, Clean Elections, and Impartial 
Administration between countries with Access to 
Information laws, and those without, indicating the 
close relationship between accountable institutions 
and Access to Information. ”
Global State of Democracy Indices, International IDEA
Political systems are made up of formal institutions, as 
well as key principles, or substance. This substance is a 
set of common ideas that underpins and permeates the 
entire system, defining the way it works. It is the common 
agreements upon which politics rest and that underpin the 
way formal institutions operate.47 They become an anchoring 
principle, and as such, they define how the system works, its 
‘philosophy’ . A fundamental such principle, as highlighted by 
the Goal 16 Target 10, is the idea that citizens have the right 
to know what is happening in their political systems. Access 
to Information legislation is a key part of this right. 
Access to information is at the heart of effective, 
accountable, and inclusive institutions, which are a 
cornerstone of Goal 16. Equal access to information for 
everyone, especially historically marginalised groups, is a key 
prerequisite for the building of such institutions. It is critical 
for political actors to be clear about how the mechanisms 
of inclusion, such as gender-targeted public funding for 
political parties or different quota systems, are prioritised in 
the political agenda, developed into policy and implemented. 
Such transparency is necessary for an evidence-based 
evaluation of progress towards more inclusive institutions 
capable of representing society in ways that can be verified.48
46 This analysis is a special contribution from International IDEA to UNESCO, 
written by Alberto Fernandez Gibaja and Alexander Hudson.
47 Daly 2019 (Daly, Tom G. Democratic Decay: Conceptualising an Emerging 
Research Field. Hague J Rule Law 11, 9–36. 2019: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40803-019-00086-2); Farrell and Schneier 2018 (Farrell, Henry John and 
Schneier, Bruce, Common-Knowledge Attacks on Democracy. October 2018: 
Berkman Klein Center Research Publication No. 2018-7, Available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3273111 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3273111). 
48 International IDEA. Gender-targeted Public Funding for Political Parties: A 
Comparative Analysis. International IDEA. 2018UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices   I
29Secondly, effective institutions rely more and more 
on data, and proper and fair management of data relies 
on openness in the way data is handled, accessed, and 
managed. Securing access to such information allows 
institutions to harness all the potential of data effectively 
without compromising fundamental rights. This has been the 
case, for example, in the efforts to bring cheaper medicines 
to patients in South Africa or to drive more effective 
reconstruction in Nepal after the 2015 earthquakes.49
Lastly, is the key role that access to information laws play 
in creating accountable institutions. Accountability 
refers to the capacity to demand answers, voice concerns 
and, if needed, enforce consequences, either positive or 
negative, on governing actors and institutions.50 It captures 
the idea that, even if decision and policy making powers 
are delegated to public authorities and representatives, the 
formal holders of power are citizens. In order to exert their 
power, full and guaranteed access to information is a 
sine qua non. For accountability to work, rights holders need 
to have access to the information necessary to answer all 
the questions they might have. Examples abound, such 
as the different anticorruption protests that have recently 
taken place, some of which were based, among other things, 
on the access (or rather lack of access) to information. 51 
In these cases, protestors demanded more accountability 
from political leadership and clear consequences for corrupt 
practices. 
At a broader level, the International IDEA’s Global State of 
Democracy Indices observed there were stark differences 
in the average levels of Checks on Government, Clean 
Elections, and Impartial Administration between 
countries with Access to Information laws, and those 
without52, indicating the close relationship between 
accountable institutions and Access to Information. This 
suggests that countries with Access to Information laws 
in place are, on average, more accountable, their institutions 
are more independent and impartial, and their elections 
are cleaner. 
When Access to Information is guaranteed through 
constitutional, statutory or policy means, not only is a legal 
mechanism created, but a change in the substance of the 
political system appears. This change in the substance 
can permeate all levels of governance, and push authorities 
49  van Schalkwyk, Young and Verhulst 2017 (van Schalkwyk. Francois, Andrew 
Young and Stefaan Verhulst. Code4SA Cheaper Medicines for Consumers. 
Open Data for Developing Economies Case Studies. July 2017); McMurren et al 
2017 (McMurren, Juliet, Saroj Bista, Andrew Young and Stefaan Verhulst. Open 
Data to Improve disaster Relief. Open Data for Developing Economies Case 
Studies. July 2017).
50  Bjuremalm, Helena, Alberto Fernandez Gibaja and Jorge Valladares. 
Democratic Accountability in Service Delivery: A Practical Guide to Identify 
Improvements through Assessment. International IDEA (2014).
51  Chayes, Sarah. Fighting the Hydra: Lessons from Worldwide Protests Against 
Corruption. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 2018.
52  International IDEA. Global State of Democracy Indices, Version 5, (1975-2020). 
2021.towards more inclusive, more effective and more accountable 
governance. It is upon these institutional principles that 
societies can flourish. 
Figure 13: Checks on Government, Clean Elections, and 
Impartial Administration between countries with and without 
ATI laws. 
No ATI LawATI LawChecks on Government
Group indicator mean0,60
0,43
No ATI LawATI LawClean Elections
Group indicator mean0,65
0,42
No ATI LawATI LawImpartial Administration
Group indicator mean0,53
0,39
Sources: International IDEA, The Global State of Democracy Indices, 1975-2020; UN 
Statistics Division, SDG Indicators
4.3. Regional Focus: Commitment 
versus action in Africa – 
Implementation is as important as 
adoption	of	Access	to	Information	laws
The AFIC study noted that the relative lack of 
disclosure in the health sector suggests vital flaws 
in the institutional setup, creating a bigger gap 
for compromised service delivery and insufficient 
dissemination of key information on COVID-related 
issues.
As a fundamental and universal human right, access to 
information (ATI) is particularly relevant in the management 
of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in providing citizens with UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices 
30reliable, timely and independent information. This, however, 
remains a challenge even in countries with constitutional and 
legal guarantees for access to information.
Fifteen countries from Africa responded to the UNESCO 
survey. Among these, 11 countries have ATI laws, three are in 
progress of being elaborated and one country does not have 
a separate legislation on ATI. Nine countries also reported 
to have a dedicated oversight institution, of which six are 
Information Commissions. Nine countries reported that their 
legal guarantee on Access to Information specifies the need 
for public bodies to also appoint public information officers 
or a specific unit to handle Access to Information requests 
from the public. Nine countries reported provisions for the 
dedicated Access to Information oversight institutions to 
provide implementation guidance and offer training to 
officials from public bodies.
With this in mind, the Africa Freedom of Information Centre 
(AFIC)53 conducted in 2021 a research project54 in some 
African countries assessing the state of implementation 
of national ATI legislation. The research found examples 
of restrictions to access to information and the use of 
emergency measures to impose broad restrictions on 
the speech of journalists, activists and whistle-blowers for 
attempting to release information on governments’ capacity 
and handling of the pandemic. According to the researchers, 
the COVID-19 pandemic in these cases had challenged 
governments’ de facto commitment to and implementation 
of the right to information. 
The AFIC project aimed at sampling the level of ATI 
implementation in three sectors: health in the context of 
COVID-19; environment/climate; and financial proactive 
disclosure of budgets. The assessments of the level of 
implementation of ATI legislation in each country were based 
on methodology developed by the Freedom of Information 
Advocates Network (FOIAnet), of which AFIC is a member. 
The methodology55 assesses the extent to which countries 
with ATI laws are implementing them properly in accordance 
with three parameters: (1) the extent to which a State is 
proactively disclosing information; (2) the extent to which 
53  The Africa Freedom of Information Centre (AFIC) is the largest membership 
pan-African civil society organization and resource center that promotes 
citizens’ right of access to information, transparency and accountability across 
Africa. AFIC has extensive experience in successfully conducting relevant 
research and proposing reforms to African governments in the areas of 
open contracting and access to information. It also has strong experience in 
strengthening capacities of both governments and civil society partners and is 
recognized as a strong partner by procurement authorities across Africa.
54  https://africafoicentre.org/download/together-for-reliable-information-civil-
society-synthesis-report-on-monitoring-sdg-16-10/
55  This study is based on data collection that was self-reported by national 
consultants. It is important to keep in mind that the study does not measure 
the entirety of any of the study countries’ implementation of their respective 
ATI legislation. Rather, the study has provided a random sampling of MDAs in 
three sectors (health in the context of COVID-19; environment/climate; and 
financial proactive disclosure of budgets) to give a snapshot of the state of ATI 
implementation of those institutions/sectors.institutional measures have been put in place to assist with 
implementation; and (3) the extent to which requests for 
information are being responded to timeously and dutifully 
(assessed via a simple request testing approach). 
The study found significant variations between countries 
in terms of governance arrangements and ability to adopt 
practices that promote transparency and accountability 
in regard to access to information. 
A special attention of this study was put on the health sector 
due to its key role in providing reliable and timely access to 
health and COVID-19 related information. On this, the study 
noted that the relative lack of disclosure in the health sector 
suggests vital flaws in the institutional setup, creating a 
compromised service delivery and insufficient dissemination 
of key information on COVID-related issues. 
Taking into consideration the findings of the AFIC study and 
the analysis based on the responses from the 15 African 
countries that responded to the UNESCO survey, it can be 
concluded that it is of key importance to have constitutional 
guarantees for ATI as well as a separate legislation on ATI. In 
addition to legal guarantees for ATI, an effective institutional 
setup is needed, including an independent ATI oversight 
body. Clearly defined and appointed roles and responsibilities 
and continuous training of duty bearers should also be 
introduced. In addition, there should be common standards 
for promoting ATI, broader collaboration between Ministries/
Departments/Agencies (MDAs), periodic reviews of ATI 
implementation, and stronger enforcement of punitive action 
against non-compliance with the law. The adoption and 
adaption of ICT is also key for maximizing reporting capacity, 
cost efficiency, efficiency in record management, timeliness, 
and easy access to information, as well as annual work plans.
Equally important, is to maintain a strong focus on the 
demand side of ATI. This includes providing continuous 
training and sensitization to civil society. Through such 
training, non-state actors, both in business and civil society, 
should and will be able to more effectively advocate for 
the full implementation of systems and processes across 
the state sector, that would in turn enable greater access to 
information. 
While the right to information (legislation and constitutional 
guarantees securing the legality of this right) is intrinsically 
important to transparent and accountable democratic 
governance, the right to information does not necessarily 
translate into access to information. ATI commitment 
and implementation by national governments, as the 
primary duty bearers for progress towards the Sustainable 
Development Goals, must therefore be consistently 
reassessed to ensure implementation of legal provisions; and 
legal provisions must be adjusted continuously to meet the 
needs of those they seek to serve; the people.UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices   I
314.4. National Focus: Promoting proactive transparency during COVID-19 in Mexico
Figure 14: Proactive transparency platform of Mexico’s INAI
As part of its policy on proactive transparency, the National 
Institute for Transparency, Access to Information Protection of 
Personal Data (INAI) of Mexico has developed a platform56 to 
promote the dissemination of useful and reliable information 
about the COVID-19 pandemic to the general public and the 
authorities.
Developed in March 2020, the platform – also called as the 
“COVID-19 microsite” – processes, systematizes, publishes 
and disseminates information about the pandemic. With 
one of the aims being to generate reassurance among the 
public during the health crisis, the platform makes visible the 
strategies, actions and measures that are part of the public 
health policy adopted by the Federal Government in Mexico.
The platform also allows visitors to consult statistics related 
to access to information (ATI) requests about COVID-19 and 
the types of information that are frequently requested. This 
way, public authorities can identify the kind of information 
that they need to publish proactively, while anticipating the 
responses they need to provide. As of 15 May 2021, as many 
as 43,556 requests had been analyzed. The information is 
56  https://micrositios.inai.org.mx/gobiernoabierto/?page_id=6775updated every 15 days to generate the following statistics: 
a) top 5 requests by categories; b) status of responses to 
requests; c) type of response provided by the obligated 
entities (public authorities that are under obligation to 
respond the requests); d) top 10 obligated entities with the 
highest number of requests; and e) historical behaviour of the 
ATI requests per day. By making available information on the 
performance of the authorities, as well as the measures and 
strategies implemented for the management of health crisis, 
the platform has also stimulated the accountability among 
public authorities.
Visitors can also access the open data section, where the 
complete database containing the ATI requests can be 
downloaded and repurposed for analysis and other uses. The 
platform also incorporates national and local transparency 
portals that concentrate useful information on COVID-19. 
As of 2021, portals of 14 state-level oversight agencies have 
been integrated into the platform: Morelos, Nuevo León, 
Quintana Roo, Oaxaca, Estado de Mexico, Veracruz, Jalisco, 
Guanajuato, Zacatecas, Guerrero, Durango, Chiapas and 
Puebla.UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices 
324.5. National Focus: Access to information by local authorities in Ukraine during 
the COVID-19 pandemic57
Figure 15: Key survey resultsKEY SURVEY RESULTS
A SURVEY ON HOW LOCAL AUTHORITIES ARE PUBLISHING 
INFORMATION ABOUT PROTECTIVE MEASURES AGAINST COVID-19, 
AND HOW THEY REPLY TO THE REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION
The survey was conducted on  24-30 March, 2020 to assess the work of holders of public information 
on how they are publishing information about protective measures against COVID-19, and how they reply 
to the requests for information
HOLDERS 
OF PUBLIC 
INFORMATION7474
34%
66%REQUESTS  
for access to public 
information 
REPLIES FOR ACCESS TO PUBLIC 
INFORMATION RECIEVED IN TIME
within 48 hours of the request 
being received74
OFFICIAL 
WEBSITES
checked148
EVALUATION 
FORMS
Oblast
Councils
undone 
doneCity Councils
at the Oblast
levelOblast
State
Administrations
30%
70%
REPLIES RECIEVED 
IN A REQUESTED 
FORMundone 
done
Source: Infographics by UNDP
57  See “Enabling the implementation of the 2030 Agenda through SDG16+: 2021 Epilogue” by the Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just and Inclusive 
Societies; source: UNDP Ukraine. Infographics in English and the full report in Ukrainian is available here: https://www.ua.undp.org/content/ukraine/en/home/library/
democratic_governance/access-to-public-info-re-covid-response.html 
Access to reliable information related to COVID-19 is of 
critical importance to provide the opportunity for the 
public to make informed decisions about their health 
and security. For this reason, the regional network of the 
Ukrainian Parliamentary Commissioner for Human Rights 
conducted a rapid monitoring on how local authorities 
were publishing information about protective measures 
against COVID-19, and how they address citizens’ freedom 
of information requests. Through this monitoring exercise, 
regional coordinators assessed the work of 74 subnational 
authorities through analysis of the local authorities’ responses 
to the freedom of information requests and evaluation of 
their official websites. The survey concluded that information holders mostly 
publish information about protective measures against 
COVID-19 systematically and on time. However, some local 
authorities need to take measures for the improvement 
of access to information, namely its comprehensiveness. 
Based on the findings of the survey, UNDP experts provided 
recommendations on how local authorities can enhance 
the provision of access to public information and widely 
promoted them through the regional network of the 
Ombudsperson’s Office. UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices   I
33The recommendations are as follows:
1. Information holders, state authorities and local 
governments during the quarantine period must ensure 
requests for public information can be submitted at all 
times by email. Email addresses for making requests must 
be published on the official websites so that everyone 
can easily find them.
2. It is necessary to organize the work of public officials and 
divisions responsible for access to public information in 
such way that they can process requests and provide 
access to information in a timely manner. Replies to the 
requests should be: #Submitted on an official form with the letterhead 
of the information holder, and with the registration 
number and signature of the responsible person;
 #Sent from an official email address for requests for 
access to public information, or from the official email 
of the information holder.
3. Regulatory and normative acts on protective measures 
against the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) must be 
immediately published on official websites. Information 
holders must publish full texts of these normative acts, 
mentioning the date when they were adopted, and their 
registration number. Plans of protective measures and 
details of where to request additional information must 
be published too. Easy navigation of the website is also 
important.UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
I  Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices 
34CONCLUSION
Reporting on SDG 16.10.2 serves as an incentive for 
countries to improve their legal regulatory frameworks, 
their implementation and/or their enforcement of Access to 
Information (ATI). In this regard, the UNESCO survey, which 
provides a standardised approach to monitoring SDG 16.10.2, 
has proven useful for countries in measuring and reporting 
progress on ATI at the national level, including through the 
Voluntary National Reviews, the Universal Periodic Review 
that concerns the human rights records, the Follow-up 
Mechanism for the Implementation of the Inter-American 
Convention against Corruption (Mecanismo de Seguimiento a 
la Convención Interamericana contra la Corrupción, MESICIC), 
and parliaments.
The findings of the survey in this report suggest that having 
a specialised ATI oversight institution is fundamental to 
ensure ATI law implementation and enforcement. This was 
made evident by the higher scores obtained by countries 
and territories that have such a specialized institution. 
Experience around the world shows that these institutions 
play key roles in advocating for standards and good 
practices, as well as helping to address challenges in ATI 
implementation. 
The low level of data availability for 2020 reinforces the need 
for the ATI oversight institutions to improve their record-
keeping systems. Fortunately, ATI oversight institutions in 
some countries and territories provide good examples in 
reorganizing their working methods during the pandemic, 
which can be replicated by other countries and territories. 
Since what cannot be measured cannot be improved, it is 
vital to ensure adequate and reliable records of the requests 
and appeals received, so that evidence can be generated 
to track progress. Good evidence-based reporting can also 
help ATI oversight institutions in negotiating for financial and technical resources with policymakers and other stakeholders, 
which in turn would help address the challenges related to 
management and limited resources. 
Emerging from the 2021 survey process, it is important 
that central bodies responsible for the SDGs involve ATI 
oversight institutions and their networks in SDG 
processes at the national and regional levels. UNESCO’s 
experience shows that these networks are indispensable in 
the improvement of ATI monitoring and reporting processes. 
As also implied by SDG 17, the power to drive change 
is vested in alliances and partnerships. The International 
Conference of Information Commissioners, Red de 
Transparencia y Acceso a la Informacion and the International 
Ombudsman Institute have all demonstrated successful 
collaborations in replicating and scaling-up initiatives that 
have accelerated both the adoption and the implementation 
of ATI guarantees. 
Equally important is to strengthen the involvement of civil 
society in the monitoring and reporting on SDG 16.10.2. 
While the UNESCO survey provides an opportunity for 
governments to make a self-assessment against their own 
performance, monitoring and reporting by civil society can 
offer alternative data and perspective. Having a direct access 
to the grassroots level, civil society can also help ensure 
that women and vulnerable groups, including persons with 
disabilities, are included in the ATI agenda. 
With nine years left to achieve the SDGs, and with global 
challenges becoming more interconnected, the message is 
clear that access to information should be the thread that 
binds together the diverse actions in rebuilding communities 
and strengthening public institutions towards 2030 and 
beyond. UNESCO 2021 REPORT ON PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION (SDG 16.10.2)  
Using Access to Information to advance the SDGs: case studies and good practices   I
35Building forward stronger with Access 
to Information
As countries are trying to emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic, the role of 
access to information continues to be critical in re-building communities 
and their public institutions. The need for openness, transparency and 
accountability has never been stronger. The world has witnessed a growing 
public appetite for information that is accurate, timely and reliable. With civic 
space becoming more reduced during the pandemic, access to information 
has helped counterbalance the situation, enabling public participation and 
civic engagement in response to the crisis. 
As the UN custodian agency for Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 
Indicator 16.10.2, UNESCO continues to report on progress on the adoption 
and the implementation of Access to Information guarantees worldwide. The 
Organization also promotes efforts around the issue, including reinforcing the 
strong relevance of access to information to crisis recovery and the attainment 
of the SDGs as a whole. 
This report captures these different dimensions, presenting key findings from 
the 2021 UNESCO Survey on Public Access to Information, assessing progress 
in 102 participating countries and territories. The report also provides policy 
makers, civil society, academia, and those interested in SDG issues with 
different case studies and good practices with a special focus on rebuilding 
communities and public institutions with access to information.
This report is supported by Sweden, Germany and the Netherlands through the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC).
9789231 005046