The Universal
Periodic Review
and its potential to fosteraccess to information
GUIDELINES FORINFORMATION COMMISSIONERS 
CI-2022/UAI/UPR/2ABOUT
These Guidelines provide 
Information Commissioners with practical advice on how to use the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) exercise to promote the right to access public information. In this document, the term Information Commissioner refers more broadly to Information Commissioners, Ombudspersons, and any other regulatory authorities, including transparency councils or boards, that are responsible for protecting, promoting, and ensuring the respect of access to public information legislation within their respective jurisdictions and that have demonstrably autonomous decision-making authority to carry out their mandate.
1 Basic Facts about the UPR:
https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/BasicFacts.aspx
I. What is the UPR?
The UPR is a State-driven, peer review mechanism, 
created by the UN General Assembly in 2006. It is conducted by the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva to ensure that every State reports on its compliance with its human rights commitments on a regular basis. The UPR is a universally applicable tool, in the same way as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It is UNIVERSAL because all 193 Member States of the 
UN must report on their human rights obligations. It is PERIODIC  because each State must come before the 
Human Rights Council every 4.5 years. It is a REVIEW  
because the reports presented by each State are reviewed at a meeting with the UPR Working Group (composed of the 47 Member States of the Human Rights Council), assisted by groups of three States (known as “troikas”) who serve as Rapporteurs. 
The UPR process began in 2006 and has held three cycles 
since then. The Third Cycle began in May 2017 and ends in 2022. The Fourth Cycle is expected to start in October 2022. In order to cover all 193 States within every 4.5 year cycle, the Human Rights Council holds three UPR Working Group Sessions annually to review some 42 States per year, that is 14 States per session.
II.What is the Goal of the UPR?
The goal of the UPR is the improvement of the human rights situation in every country.  This involves assessing States’ human rights records and addressing human rights violations wherever they occur. The UPR also aims to provide technical assistance to States.
1GUIDELINES FOR INFORMATION COMMISSIONERS2III. How does the UPR process work?
Prior to the Review
•     Every State is placed in a schedule to ensure all interested parties are informed well in  
       advance of when it is to be reviewed during the upcoming UPR cycle.  
•     During this stage, three documents are prepared. The three reports are meant to offer    
       a comprehensive overview of the human rights situation in the country:
a) The National report is a report presented by the State
b) The Compilation of UN information is a report of information provided by the 
UN entities, including Treaty Bodies, United Nations Country Teams (UNCTs) and 
individual agencies, funds and programmes, and compiled by the Office of the 
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
c) The Summary of Stakeholders’ information is a report of information from 
national human rights institutions, regional bodies, and NGOs, compiled by 
OHCHR  
•     The three reports are made publicly available in advance of the review of each State.
During the Review
• The Review itself is held in Geneva and consists of a 3.5 hour interactive dialogue  
with the UPR Working Group, which is broadcast live on UN WebTV2  and can be 
viewed by anyone.
• The State under review presents its National Report, after which Member States may 
ask questions and propose recommendations. These recommendations are included 
in an outcome document on which the State under review may make preliminary 
comments, choosing to either “accept” or “note” the recommendations.• The UN Charter
• The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
• Human rights instruments to which the State is party (e.g. human rights treaties it has ratified).
• Voluntary commitments made (e.g. national human rights policies and/or programmes implemented).
• Applicable international humanitarian law.During the UPR process Member States must report on compliance with their human rights 
obligations and commitments as set out in: 
2 https://media.un.org/en/webtvThe UPR cycle has three distinct phases, which can be define as follows: prior the review, 
during the review, and after the review. 1
THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster access to information3IV. The Right to Access Public Information  
The existence of a right of access to public information is increasingly accepted around the world, 
both at the domestic and at the international level.  
In 2021, there are 135 laws protecting access to public information 3.
Internationally, the existence of a right of access to public information is often included in 
international human rights documents, mostly, but not exclusively, in the context of the right to 
freedom of expression. For instance:
The Council of Europe Convention on Access to Official Documents, which came into force on 
December 1, 2020 is the first binding international legal instrument to recognize a general right of 
access to official documents held by public authorities5.  
At a time when disinformation is increasingly at play, the ability for the public to be able to access 
official information is crucial. In addition, world challenges such as the global health crisis and the 
exponential development of technology, such as surveillance devices using AI, require increased 
transparency and a vigilant protection of citizens’ right to know.
As expressed in a UNESCO report: “In the 21st century, information has become one of the 
most important factors affecting human rights, development, democracy and the private life of 
the citizen ”6.• The State under review cannot “reject” recommendations but can provide comments on “noted” 
recommendations, including explanations on why they do not support them. 
• At the plenary, the State under review is allotted 20 minutes to make a final statement, provide 
its final answers to recommendations and describe plans for implementation. A total of 
20 minutes is also allotted to States that have made recommendations and to Civil Society 
Organisations.
• The Final Report is adopted at a plenary session of the Human Rights Council some three 
months later.
After the Review
• Between the end of a review and the start of the next one, States are expected to take practical 
steps to implement recommendations that were accepted. States, stakeholders, and UN entities 
can, on a voluntary basis, submit midterm reports or annual updates to reflect the current 
situation and the extent to which recommendations are being fulfilled.
3 According to the Access Info Europe and Center for Law and Democracy Global Right to Information Rating, which currently lists 129 rated countries with 6 countries who have 
passed laws but are not yet rated: https://www.rti-rating.org/country-data/
4 https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/udhr.pdf
5 Council of Europe Convention on Access to Official Documents: https://rm.coe.int/1680084826
6 Access to Information: A New Promise for Sustainable Development – p. 7: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371485
2
GUIDELINES FOR INFORMATION COMMISSIONERS4V. The Right to Access Public Information and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a universal call to action to end 
poverty, protect the planet and improve the lives and prospects of everyone, 
everywhere7. The 17 Goals were adopted by all UN Member States in 2015 and are part 
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development8.
The 2030 Agenda recognizes that ensuring access to public information is critical for 
the achievement of the SDGs9. 
• In 2019, 2020, and 2021, UNESCO, as the custodian agency for reporting on global 
progress on SDG Indicator 16.10.2 conducted studies and surveys to measure the 
adoption and implementation of ATI guarantees. The 2020 UNESCO Report on the 
monitoring and reporting of SDG Indicator 16.10.2 concluded that: “[…] while 127 UN 
Member States have adopted various ATI legal guarantees, states that have not adopted 
such guarantees could boost ATI for their citizens by considering similar steps. ” It also 
concluded that: “[…] more efforts are needed to ensure effective implementation of 
ATI. Those respondents who have a specialized ATI oversight body are likely to perform 
better in implementation than those without. ”10  It further stated that more efforts, 
especially in record keeping, are needed to ensure effective implementation of the ATI 
framework.
• The 2030 Agenda commitment to “Leave no one behind” is rooted in a basic premise of 
equality and non-discrimination and its achievement depends heavily on citizens’ ability 
to be informed and to participate in the public debate in a safe and meaningful way. 
• The inter-linkages between the right of access to information and developmental 
imperatives lies at the core of the 2030 Agenda. For example, ATI means improving 
access to healthcare and water by empowering people with knowledge to assess services, 
and enabling stakeholders to hold governments and companies accountable for delivery. 
ATI legislation and its rigorous implementation promotes development as well as 
democracy. It is an essential tool to fight corruption. 
• The 2030 Agenda encourages UN Member States to conduct regular reviews of progress. 
These national reviews can be done annually for domestic purposes, and they can also 
take the form of Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) that are presented to the UN 
General Assembly. In 2019, 47 countries presented their VNRs. Of these, 28 countries 
reported on SDG Indicator 16.10.211. 
• The information gathered in relation to SDGs and VNRs can be used to advance the 
right to access public information via the UPR binding process and vice versa. 
7 https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/development-agenda/
8 https://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E
9 From Promise to Practice: Access to Information for Sustainable Development p. 4: https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/unesco_report_16102.pdf  
10 Ibid, p.5.
11 Supra, n 10, p.18 -19
3THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster access to information5VI. The Right to Access Public Information and the UPR process 
Since 2006, according to UNESCO’s analysis of the UPR database12, 122 
recommendations have mentioned access to information in one context or another. Out 
of these, two-thirds (93) were supported by the respective Member States under review. 
In the UPR First Cycle (2008-2012), there were 16 recommendations on the right 
of access to public information. Nine of these recommendations were supported. 
In the Second Cycle (2012-2016), there were 50 recommendations on ATI and 31 
were supported. In the current Third Cycle (2017 – 2022) there have been so far 56 
recommendations on ATI and 53 have been supported.
Evidently, there is an increase in the number of recommendations made and supported, 
but the scope of the recommendations has also expanded and evolved with time. 
Among the 152 recommendations that mention ATI in one context or another (there are 
some that overlap), there are 122 that link ATI to freedom of opinion and expression and/
or freedom of the press. Many of these dealt with the enactment or the improvement of 
access to information laws.
The Second and Third Cycles have given rise to more sophisticated recommendations 
focusing on associated rights and policies, aimed at ensuring access to information by 
marginalized groups and balancing the right of access to information with the right to 
privacy .
There are also other references in 20 recommendations of the link between access 
to information and the right to health, 17 with rights of the child, 7 to privacy and 
6 to assisting persons with disabilities. One recommendation mentioned access 
to information in the context of the right to education. Another recommendation 
linked access to information with the improvement of access to communications 
technology for Indigenous Peoples and rural population. Women’s rights feature in 28 
recommendations among the reasons cited for strengthening ATI13.
As a binding process for Member States, the UPR process is critical to advancing the right 
to access public information. 
VII. Why should Information Commissioners engage in the UPR? 
The drafting of the National Report in terms of the UPR, and the Voluntary National 
Review in terms of the SDG process, is usually led by foreign affairs ministries and/or 
justice ministries and governmental statistical agencies. These government entities are 
not usually at the forefront of monitoring implementation of the access to information 
laws. The mere existence of an access to information law, often reflected on as an 
achievement of the UPR and SDG targets, is not enough to assess the access to 
information framework in each country. Mechanisms for implementation are critical in 
ensuring that the law delivers in reality what is promised on paper.  
Information Commissioners are recognized as an essential component of a well 
functioning legal framework for access to information. They are experts, in some cases 
with a high level of independence, with unique, experience-based and trustworthy 
perspectives on how to promote, protect and implement the right of access to public 
information as a key pillar of democracy. In their role as overseers of the implementation 
of access to information laws in their respective jurisdictions, they possess, or have 
access to, relevant information on the regulatory framework and key data on the 
12 https://upr-info-database.uwazi.io
13 Supra n 10, p.234GUIDELINES FOR INFORMATION COMMISSIONERS6effectiveness of its implementation, including on the performance of the institutions 
covered by the legislation. They also benefit from insights by civil society groups that 
may expose issues with the system. They have a critical level of detail on the state 
of implementation and a more fulsome perspective of the situation of the access to 
information regime. As such, they can play a significant role in enhancing the quality 
of assessment of the state of access to public information in each Member State being 
reviewed and make impactful recommendations for improvement.  
All this highlight why Information Commissions can consider to proactively reach out to 
offer information to the relevant lead actor in government concerning UPR. The result 
will be a more accurate representation of the country in its UPR engagements insofar as 
ATI is concerned. 
The knowledge and expertise are also relevant for another channel to engagement 
for UPR processes. This is indirectly, via potential representations, by associations of 
Information Commissions.  
In recent years, Information Commissioners have developed informal and formal 
networks to work collaboratively at the national 14, regional 15 and international level 16. 
This collaborative work equips them with added capacity and reach to assemble data on 
how ATI is actually working and provide for solid and credible findings about the state of 
play. 
The implication of Information Commissioners in the UPR process is aligned with the 
Strategic priorities of the Information Commissioners International Conference for 2021-
2024 17. In particular, Strategic Priority #4 to: “Demonstrate global leadership in access 
to public information rights” which points to possibilities for contributing to UPR with 
members of ICIC and sharing outcomes as a stakeholder institution.
In addition, the Information Commissioners recently signed a MOU with UNESCO 
agreeing to cooperate in the promotion of ATI laws and the strengthening of their 
implementation 18. 
Through this, many Information Commissioners have been collecting relevant 
information based on the UNESCO survey template for monitoring SDG Indicator 
16.10.2. 
Such activity in combination with their expertise, and mostly their independence, 
positions Information Commissioners well to make meaningful recommendations on 
access to public information as part of the UPR process. 
The participation of Information Commissioners in the UPR process has the potential to 
increase and accelerate the development and the implementation of the right to access 
public information on the ground in all UN Member States thereby also advancing the 
2030 Agenda and improving the lives of all citizens, particularly those belonging to 
marginalized groups. 
14 For instance, in federated states like Canada or Germany, Commissioners at the federal level often collaborate with provincial or subnational Commissioners. See for instance the 
latest joint resolution from Canada: https://www.oic-ci.gc.ca/en/resources/news-releases/federal-provincial-and-territorial-information-and-privacy-commissioners#jr
15 Red de Transparencia y Accesso a la Informacion (RTA): https://redrta.org/ ; African Network of Information Commissioners
16 The International Conference of Information Commissioners (ICIC): https://www.informationcommissioners.org/gallery, 
17 https://cdn.website-editor.net/61ed7ac1402f428695fcc2386ad0577f/files/uploaded/ICIC-resolution-ICIC-strategic-priorities.pdf
18 Memorandum of Understanding between UNESCO and the ICIC, 
https://cdn.website-editor.net/61ed7ac1402f428695fcc2386ad0577f/files/uploaded/UNESCO-ICIC-mou-202012.pdf5THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster access to information7VIII. How can Information Commissioners use the UPR process to promote the right to information
Each Information Commissioner operates under a distinct legislative or regulatory 
framework and in different countries with unique circumstances, and Information 
Commissioner mandates, their roles, their powers, their resources, and their capacity 
vary widely from country to country. 
Depending on the circumstances of each Information Commissioner, there are several 
ways to promote the right to access public information using the UPR process, either 
individually or through collaborative networks, as signalled above.
What is described below is a non exhaustive list of possible concrete ways in which 
Information Commissioners could make impactful recommendations through the 
UPR process individually and/or jointly as part of a regional or international network 
submission. 
As described earlier in section III, the UPR process encompasses three distinct phases, 
namely prior to the review, during the review, and after the review. Prior to the review, 
three reports are prepared: the National report, the Compilation of UN information 
report, and the Summary of Stakeholders report.
A jurisdiction with an Information Commissioner presupposes some form of existing 
legislative or regulatory framework for access to public information. In this situation, 
Information Commissioners could consider the following options: 
1. Providing a written submission to be included in the Member State’s National Report. 
a. In doing so, the Information Commissioners may consider making its submission 
public as part of the promotion of ATI.
b. This public submission could also be considered by UN entities in their compilation of   
UN information report. 
c. Such a submission does not require any specific format, except as coordinated by the 
Member State.
 
2. Providing information to feed a written submission by a network of Information 
Commissioners to be included in the Summary of Stakeholders report.
 
a. A regional or international network, such as the RED or the ICIC, could endorse the      
submission of one of its members and provide a joint submission to support the      
development of the right of access in this particular jurisdiction. 
b. Specific technical guidelines for such a submission are provided in Annex A to this      
document.
In preparation for these submissions and for the following phases of the UPR process, 
Information Commissioners could consider the following steps:68GUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS
 
-Determine the date of the State review.
-Determine who are the responsible entities within the Government of the Member  
State under review.
-Within the scope of its powers, encourage the State under review to include   
consideration of access to information issues and to hold a broad consultation process  
including all Information Commissioners in their country (in federated states or multiple 
levels of governments with Information Commissioners).
-Post information on the State consultation process on the Information Commissioner’s 
official social media and website to alert stakeholders and seek their input.  
-Review past reports and recommendations using the publicly available reports, databases 
and the UPR Matrix19. The document, prepared by the government of a Member State, 
contains a list of UPR recommendations, an update on their implementation status, actions 
taken by the Government, a list of partners, etc. 
-Assess the implementation status of the various recommendations.  
-Review and assess the status of the right of access to information within the State under 
review.
-Consult with other Information Commissioners at the local, subnational, and national level 
to seek their input and reach consensus on a joint position on recommendations, if possible. 
-Consider holding various roundtables with experts, civil society, and the private sector.
-Consider holding round-table events in the context of the International Day for Universal 
Access to Information (28 September) and signalling the relevance of UPR. 
-Review the commitments of the State under review under the 2030 Agenda, and the Open 
Government Partnership, if applicable.   
-Review developments by sub-national bodies, regional networks, international networks 
and other organizations for up-to-date research and insights about the field of ATI. 
There are several organizations that work to advance freedom of expression, the right to 
information and to stop corruption, such as UNESCO, Article 1920, Transparency Inter -
national21, the Carter Center22 and the Organisation of American States23, to name a few. 
The work of these organizations could be consulted to supplement the work of 
Information Commissioners in informing their input into the UPR process.
-Inform media, parliamentarians, state independent agencies and UNCTs of your 
submission.
-Comment on the national report if it is available publicly - if not - advocate for its 
publication.
19 Documentation by country: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/CLIndex.aspx
20 Article 19: https://www.article19.org/
21 Transparency International: https://www.transparency.org/en
22 Carter Center: https://www.cartercenter.org/
23 Organisation of American States: http://www.oas.org/en/default.asp7
UPR CYCLE PHASES
I. Prior to the UPR country review9-For the preparation of a possible submission by a network of Information Commissioners:
Consider the possibility of forming a working group within regional or international net-
works to develop a joint submission to be included in the submission for the    
Summary of Stakeholders report to support an Information Commissioner within a Member 
State or several Information Commissioners with limited capacity in various Member States.
II. During the UPR country review
-Post the date and time of the Review on Information Commissioner’s official social media and website.
-Host an event with stakeholders to view the Working Group Sessions and Plenaries.
-Consider seeking permission to attend the Working Group and the Plenary in person.
-Consider seeking permission to make a statement at the Plenary.
III. After the UPR country review
-Publicly comment on the Final Report. 
-Keep track and assess progress of the Member State’s commitments and link to those also   
made under the SDGs and the Open Government Partnership. 
-Incorporate relevant recommendations as part of regular decisions by Information    
Commissioners within their jurisdictions, for example when issuing a decision on providing   
certain public information. This could help to increase awareness and knowledge of the UPR   
process and how such a system has evaluated the country and which recommendation has been   
made and accepted.
-Provide input into recommendations that were not accepted by the Member State but were   
noted with a view to having them adopted eventually.
-If the State under review does not voluntarily provide a mid-term report, encourage them   
publicly to do so.
-Comment on the midterm report.
-Publicly post an assessment at midterm.
-Follow up on the implementation of the recommendations.
-Prepare for the subsequent review as per above.
For jurisdictions without an Information Commissioner and/or without a legislative or regulatory 
framework for access to information, the ICIC could play a prominent role in advancing the right to 
access public information. It could consider the following options:
1. Identifying the Member States that do not have access to information law and/or a mech-
anism for the effective implementation of the law
2. Providing a joint submission, in accordance with the technical guidance in Annex A, 
to be included in the Summary of Stakeholders report for the Member States identified 
above
3. In the longer term, the ICIC could seek recognition from the OHCHR to submit inde-
pendent reports on the status of access to information laws and implementation within 
Member States as part of the UPR processTHE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists810  GUIDELINES FOR UNITED NATIONS COUNTRY TEAMS
UPR RECOMMENDATIONS:
As noted above, there have been several recommendations in the past UPR cycles    
dealing with access to information. For jurisdictions where Member States already have an access to 
information regime and/or an oversight body, possible recommendations that could be put forward 
by stake holders include the following:
-Enact a clear provision for a public interest override. 
 
-Review the access to information legislation to ensure that it incorporates the gender 
perspective as embedded in the OAS Model Law 2.0. 24 (In Cycle 2 of the UPR, it was 
recommended to a country that it ensures adequate access to information on sexual and 
reproductive rights for women and girls). 
 
-Enact a clear and enforceable Duty to Document provision.25 
 
-Proactively disclose information related to the pandemic (this would be consistent and 
supportive of the ICIC’s most recent joint resolution). 
 
-Promote proactive transparency standards and practices in global crises or emergencies 
(this would be consistent with the 2020 RED public statement).26  
 
-Promote transparency in algorithms, that structure information (this would be consistent 
and supportive of the 2019 ICIC joint resolution).27   
 
-Uphold an open Internet (in Cycle 3 of the UPR,  it was recommended to a country that it 
refrains from imposing restrictions on telecommunications networks and restricting access 
to the Internet, including social networks and email sites, to guarantee the rights of freedom 
of expression and access to information). 
 
-Serve vulnerable people and respect rights (in Cycle 3 of the UPR, it was recommended 
to a country that it implements policies that facilitate equal access to information and 
communications technology, in particular for Indigenous Peoples, rural population and 
women. Adopt specific legislation to protect and promote human rights in the digital 
environment, including the right to privacy).
For the approximately 60 jurisdictions where Member States do not have an access 
to information regime and/or do not have an oversight body, recommendations 
that could be put forward by the ICIC could be aligned with the UN 
Statistical Commission core indicators of SDG Indicator 16.10.228:
-Enact constitutional and/or statutory guarantees of public access to public sector 
information.
-Ensure effective implementation of statutory guarantees of public access to public sector 
information.
This would contribute to the acceleration of sustainable solutions via the UPR 
exercise and be consistent with Cycle 3 recommendations that aim to integrate the 
SDG into the UPR process29.
24 https://www.oas.org/en/sla/dil/docs/publication¬_Inter-American_Model_Law_2_0_on_Access_to_Public_Information.pdf
25 https://www.informationcommissioners.org/icic-signs-joint-statement-on-proactive-publication-of-information-relating-to-the-covid-19-pandemic
26 https://redrta.org.wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Declaration-RTA_covid_VF-en-us.pdf
27 https://cdn.website-editor.net/61ed7ac1402f428695fcc2386ad0577f/files/uploaded/ICIC%25202019%2520-%2520DE%2520%2520Resolution_final%2520draft_11.03.2019.pdf
28 UN Statistical Commission: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/inputs/?str=access+to+information+
29 According to the UPR database, there were 92 recommendations made in Cycle 3 related to the SDGs. 80 of those were accepted. See n 11 supra.9THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster access to information11Moving forward 
Access to information is key to fostering increased levels of transparency and a more 
effective fight against corruption. It fosters public trust, and empowers citizens, 
particularly those that are marginalised, allowing them to seek and obtain crucial 
information to improve their lives. It is a key pillar of democracy. As such, it is essential to 
the exercise and the recognition of all human rights. 
The right to access public information is also critical to the successful implementation 
of all the targets of the 2030 Agenda and especially those under SDG 16. Synergies 
between the two UN led initiatives, the UPR and the SDGs, present an opportunity to 
foster the enactment and improvement of the right to seek and receive information in all 
Member States. 
 
Information Commissioners and their networks have unparalleled expertise and are 
uniquely positioned, as independent or autonomous oversight bodies, to use these 
processes for the benefit of their societies. 10GUIDELINES FOR INFORMATION COMMISSIONERS12UN references:
• Basic Facts about the UPR: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/
BasicFacts.aspx
• Maximizing the use of the Universal Periodic Review at country level: https://www.
ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/UPR/UPR_Practical_Guidance.pdf
• Cycles of the Universal Periodic Review: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/
Pages/CyclesUPR.aspx
• The Sustainable Agenda: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/
development-agenda/
• Transforming our world: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: https://
www. un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E
• Documentation by country: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/
CLIndex.aspx
• Universal Periodic Review (Third Cycle): Information and guidelines for relevant 
stakeholders’ written submissions: https://www.upr-info.org/sites/default/files/
general-document/pdf/upr_technicalguidelines3rdcycle_submissions.pdf
• UN Statistical Commission: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/
inputs/?str=access+to+information+
• Decade of Action to Deliver Goals: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/
decade-of-action/
UNESCO publications and resources
• The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: https://sustainabledevelopment.
un.org/content/documents/21252030%20Agenda%20for%20Sustainable%20
Development%20web.pdf
• From Promise to Practice: Access to Information for Sustainable Development: 
https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/unesco_report_16102.pdf
• Memorandum of Understanding between UNESCO and the ICIC: https://cdn.website-
editor.net/61ed7ac1402f428695fcc2386ad0577f/files/uploaded/UNESCO-ICIC-
mou-202012.pdf
• Access to Information: A New Promise for Sustainable Development: https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371485 
Other References:
• International Conference of Information Commissioners (ICIC): https://www.
informationcommissioners.org/
• ICIC Johannesburg Charter, https://www.informationcommissioners.org/the-icic-
johannesburg-charter
• Red de transparencia y accesso a la informacion: https://redrta.org
• Open Government Partnership: https://www.opengovpartnership.org/about
• Article 19: https://www.article19.org/
• Transparency International : https://www.transparency.org/en
• Carter Center : https://www.cartercenter.org/
• Organisation of American States : http://www.oas.org/en/default.asp
• Open Society Foundation: https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/
• Centre for Law and Democracy: https://www.law-democracy.org/live/
• UPR-INFO: https://www.upr-info.org/en11
BIBLIOGRAPHYTHE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster access to information13ANNEX: 
Technical guidelines for written submissions30
1. Submissions must contain credible and reliable information on the right to access 
public information in the State under review, highlight issues of concern, best 
practices and recommendations.
2. First-hand information should be given priority as well as Information Commissioners 
views, findings and conclusions.
3. Information Commissioners and/or Information Commissioners networks may make 
recommendations in the submissions.
4. Recommendations should be S.M.A.R.T.: Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Result-
Oriented and Time-Bound, and linked to the issues addressed in the submission.
5. Submissions should be specifically tailored for the UPR and contain information on 
the follow-up to the preceding reviews, including an assessment of, and comments 
on, the implementation of recommendations.
6. When referring to recommendations from previous cycles, the clear identification 
of each recommendation (HRC report, cycle, paragraph number, recommendation 
number and recommending country) is encouraged, as it will contribute better to 
reporting on the status of implementation and follow-up to the preceding reviews. 
7. If reference is made to repeated recommendations from the previous cycles, all 
recommendations by cycle and report number should be clearly identified, also 
indicating that the recommendation is a repeated one.
8. Follow-up information and analysis should be given on: progress made in the 
implementation of recommendations, its impact on the right to access public 
information, regressive actions if any, and the identification of the actions that 
remain to be taken for full implementation, if any, in the form of a recommendation 
to the State under review.
9. Measuring and reporting on the level of implementation of recommendations, 
including against indicators that may have been defined by States as part of their 
follow-up action plans, may also be done by using values (e.g. numbers, percentages 
or categories such as “fully implemented” , “partially implemented” , “in the process 
of implementation” and “not implemented yet”), with relevant explanations. With 
respect to any non-implemented recommendations, challenges or needs of technical 
cooperation could be identified.
10. A matrix of thematically clustered recommendations is available at: http://www.
ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/NgosNhris.aspx
11. It may be useful to add into the column in the matrix of thematically clustered 
recommendations any such values and comments in the implementation of 
previous recommendations. The matrix may be submitted as an annex to the main 
submission. Its input is not added to the word count of the submission. 
12. When available and relevant, Information Commissioners may also share progress 
reports (e.g. mid term/periodic progress reports) by including them in an annex.
13. Submissions should be accessible for persons with disabilities.
30 This annex is an adaptation for Information Commissioners of
 the UPR Guidelines for Stakeholders which can be consulted at: Universal Periodic Review (Third Cycle): Information and guidelines for relevant stakeholders’ written submissions: 
https://www.upr-info.org/sites/default/files/general-document/pdf/upr_technical guidelines3rdcycle_submissions.pdf12GUIDELINES FOR INFORMATION COMMISSIONERS14Format:    
1. Written submissions must be saved and submitted as a Word Document only.
2. Written submissions must be clearly identifiable. The cover page of the submission 
must clearly identify the submitting Information Commissioner (letterhead, name 
and acronym, logo, webpage, email and postal address, etc.). For joint submissions, a 
list of organizations should be added as an endnote in the cover page or as an annex 
to the document.
3. A brief description of the main activities of the organisation/network must be 
included (not included in the word count). A paragraph describing the main activities 
of the submitting Information Commissioners/Information Commissioner network, 
as well as date of establishment, especially for those organizations which interact 
with the UN for the first time. 
4. Individual submissions must not exceed 2815 words (additional documentation can 
be annexed for reference). Joint submissions must not exceed 5630 words. The cover 
page, endnotes and annexes will not be counted within the word/page limits. 
5. Information Commissioners should only use endnotes to reference information. 
Endnotes should not include any substantive information therein as it will not be 
taken into consideration in the Stakeholder Summary.
6. Paragraphs and pages must be numbered.
7. Written contributions must be submitted in UN official languages only .
Confidentiality: 
1. Submissions will be publicly available on OHCHR’s UPR country webpages, with the 
name of the submitting Information Commissioners or Information Commissioner 
network.
2. References to individual cases should be made only if the safety and well-being 
of all concerned individuals is not at risk. Any act of reprisal should be reported at 
reprisals@ohchr.org.
Timeline:
1. Tentative deadlines for Information Commissioners submissions can be found on the 
OHCHR UPR webpage (http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/NgosNhris.
aspx). Information Commissioners should check these pages regularly for updates 
and/or extensions. 
2. Information Commissioners should send written submissions to OHCHR at least six 
(6) months before the relevant session of the Working Group on UPR, in order for 
the Secretariat to be able to complete the documentation ten (10) weeks before the 
session, so that it may be made available in all UN official languages six (6) weeks 
before the session.13THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW 
and its potential to foster access to information153. Submissions received after the deadline will not be considered.
4. Submissions are final.
Where and how to submit written submissions:
1. Submissions must be sent through the “On-line UPR Submissions Registration 
System” at the following link: https://uprdoc.ohchr.org
2. The Information Commissioners or the Information Commissioner network will have 
to open an organization profile in the system.
3. All submissions used by the Secretariat will be listed in the Endnote 1 of the 
Stakeholders Summary report and posted on the UPR country webpages. Joint 
submissions will be referred to in the UPR documentation as “Joint Submissions” and 
identified with a number, as well as with the name of the Network and/or the list of 
organizations which form part of the network.
4. Information Commissioners or Information Commissioner networks can submit: 
(a) a cover letter/page; (b) one main submission (and translations in different UN 
languages) and (c) a maximum of 10 annexes.
5. Once submissions have been uploaded in the system, Information Commissioners or 
Information Commissioner networks will receive an automatic confirmation of their 
submission. 
6. The system does not allow the Information Commissioners or Information 
Commissioner networks to add documents for a country after the automatic 
confirmation of their initial submission has been received. Additional documents 
(such as translations of submissions, cover letters or annexes) should be sent by 
email to the UPR Submissions Helpdesk.
Contact Information:
UPR Submissions Helpdesk: uprsubmissions@ohchr.org
OHCHR National Institutions, Regional Mechanisms and Civil Society Section:
National Institutions and regional Mechanisms: nationalinstitutions@ohchr.org
Civil Society: civilsociety@ohchr.org
Additional Resources: 
OHCHR UPR webpage: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/UPRMain.aspx
OHCHR UPR webpage for NGOs and NHRIs: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies\UPR/
Pages\NgosNhris.aspx
Chapter VII of Working with the United Nations Human Rights Programme: A Handbook 
for Civil Society: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/AboutUs\Civil Society/Pages/Handbook.aspx1416About the author
Suzanne Legault is a former Information Commissioner of Canada (2010 – 2018).  
Previously ,she was the Deputy Commissioner of Competition at Canada’s Competition Bureau.  
She started her legal career in Criminal law and practised as Defence counsel and as Crown prose -
cutor. She currently works as an international consultant. She is a Board member of Transparency 
International Canada and of the Québec Press Council.  
Published in 2022 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP , France ©UNESCO. This document is available 
in Open Access under the Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) License. By 
using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of 
the UNESCO Open Access Repository. The designations employed and the presentation of 
material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or 
of its authorities, or concerning the delimation of its frontiers or boundaries. The ideas and 
opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those
of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. 
15