 214 EX/13.I V 
 
 Job: 202200279
 Executive Board  
 PARIS, 28 February 2022 
Original : English  
Item 13 of the provisional agenda 
IMPLEMENTATION OF STANDARD- SETTING INSTRUMENTS  
PART I V 
2003 RECOMMENDATION CONCERNING THE PROMOTION AND USE OF 
MULTILINGUALISM AND UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO CYBERSPACE  
– PREPARATIONS FOR THE NEXT CONSULTATION  
SUMMARY  
Pursuant to 40 C/Resolution 93, and in compliance with 
177 EX/Decision 35.I and 196 EX/Decision 20 on the Specific multi -
stage procedure for the monitoring of the implementation of 
UNESCO conventions and recommendations for which no specific 
institutional mechanism is provided, the next consolidated report on 
the implementation of the 2003 Recommendation C oncerning the 
Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to 
Cyberspace should be submitted to the General Conference at its 
42nd session in 2023.  
In accordance with stage 3(b) of the above- mentioned Specific 
multi- stage procedure, the Secretariat is to seek the advice of the 
Committee on the Conventions and Recommendations prior to the 
collection of information from Member States in order to prepare 
the next consolidated report on the implementation of the 2003 
Recommendation. This document presents draft guidelines 
developed to guide the reporting on the implementation of the  
2003 Recommendation.  
Decision required: paragraph 9 . Two hundred and fourteenth session  214 EX/13.IV  
 BACKGROUND  
1.  The 2003 Recommendation Concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and 
Universal Access to Cyberspace (the “2003 Recommendation”), adopted by UNESCO’s General 
Conference at its 33rd session on 15 October 2003, is the first -ever normative instrument to promote 
linguistic diversity and universal access to multilingual information and knowledge in cyberspace. It 
marks a milestone in UNESCO’s work towards the building of inclusive, participatory, pluralistic and 
open knowledge societies and contributes  to the implementation of the Global Action Plan of the 
International Decade of Indigenous Languages 2022- 20321.  
2. The 2003 Recommendation aims to assist Member States at the national level in taking 
necessary measures on the promotion and use of multil ingualism and universal access to 
cyberspace. These measures include (i) awareness raising on the crucial role of linguistic diversity, multilingual and universal access to cyberspace, (ii) formulation of comprehensive language- related 
policies, (iii) allo cation of necessary resources in particular for the inclusion of new languages in the 
digital world with a special focus on lesser -used, minority and endangered languages, (iv) capacity 
building of national and regional institutions to foster the implement ation of language policies and 
training of key players on technical applications, (v) development of public domain content and appropriate language tools taking into consideration interests of rights -holders and the public interest; 
and (vi) other actions which contribute to the preservation, revitalization and promotion of 
multilingualism and universal access to cyberspace.  
3. In compliance with 40 C/Resolution 93, the Director -General will report for the fifth time on the 
measures taken by Member States to implement the 2003 Recommendation at the 42nd session of 
the General Conference in 2023.  
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY  
4.  Under Article VIII of UNESCO’s Constitution, Member States are required to submit a report 
on the legislative and administrative provisions and any other measures they have taken to 
implement the conventions and recommendations adopted by the Organization. In accordance with 
the Specific multi- stage procedure for the monitoring of the implementation of UNESCO conventions 
and recommendations for which no specific institutional mechanism is provided, as adopted by the 
Executive Board at its 177th session (177 EX/Decision 35.I) and amended at its 196th session 
(196 EX/Decision 20) , the frequency for submitting the reports is set for an interval of four years.  
5.  In compliance with Stage 3(b) of the above -mentioned Specific multi -stage procedure, the 
Director -General presents the methodology for the fifth consultation on the implementation of the 
2003 Recommendation by Member States.  
6. The fift h consultation of Member States will be launched following the Executive Board’s 
approval of the draft guidelines. The approved guidelines will be sent by May 2022 to national 
authorities in charge of preparing the reports on the implementation of the 2003 Recommendation, 
establishing 15 November 2022 as the deadline for submission of the reports. The Secretariat will subsequently prepare the fifth consolidated report covering the period 2019- 2023. The fifth 
consolidated report will then be examined by the Executive Board at its 216th session, in the spring 
of 2023, and by the General Conference at its 42nd session in 2023.  
7. It is recommended that the guidelines be filled in and submitted by the ministries responsible 
for the promotion of access to information and knowledge, linguistic diversity and language 
standardization. Member States are also encouraged to organize the necessary consultations within 
and outside the concerned ministries and institutions, including with key institutions working in the 
area of access to information in the public domain and application of Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs), professional associations, National Commissions for UNESCO and relevant 
 
1  41 C/INF.14  214 EX/13.IV –  page 2 
 National Committees. The proposed guidelines have been established based on the topics set out 
in the 2003 Recommendation2. 
8. The contribution to this fifth consultation should be made available in the form of an electronic 
document to be completed and submitted by email to the Secretariat in English or French.  
Proposed draft decision  
9. In light of the above, the Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision along the following 
lines:  
The Executive Board,  
1. Bearing in mind Member States’ obligations under Article VIII of UNESCO’s Constitution 
and Article 17 of the Rules of Procedure concerning recommendations to Member States and international conventions covered by the terms of Article IV, paragraph 4, of the 
Constitution,  
2. Recalling  177 EX/Decision 35.I and 196 EX/Decision 20 on the Specific multi -stage 
procedure for the monitoring of the implementation of UNESCO conventions and 
recommendations for which no specific institutional mechanism is provided,  
3. Also recalling  40 C/Resolution 93,  
4. Having examined  document 214 EX/13.IV and the report of the Committee on 
Conventions and Recommendations (CR) thereon (document 214 EX/..),  
5. Underlining the importance of the 2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and 
Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace for the promotion of linguistic 
diversity and multilingualism as a key pillar in building pluralistic, equitable, open and 
inclusive knowledge societies, and for the organization of the International Decade of 
Indigenous Languages (2022- 2032),  
6. Approves  the guidelines for the preparation of reports by Member States on the 
implementation of the 2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of 
Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace, as set out in the Annex to 
document 214 EX/13.IV;  
7. Requests  the Director -General to invite Member States to submit their reports on the 
implementation of the 2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of 
Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace;  
8. Also requests  the Director -General to submit to it at its 216th session the next 
consolidated report on the implementation of the 2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace, with a  view 
to transmitting that report, together with the Executive Board’s comments thereon, to the General Conference at its 42nd session.  
 
 
2 http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and -information-/access-to -knowledge/linguistic -diversity -and-
multilingualism -on-internet/normative-instruments/recommendation/  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex  
 ANNEX  
DRAFT GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION OF REPORTS BY MEMBER STATES ON THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 2003 RECOMMENDATION  
CONCERNING THE PROMOTION AND USE OF MULTILINGUALISM AND  
UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO CYBERSPACE 
Preliminar y remarks  
These Guidelines are intended to assist Member States in the preparation of their reports on the 
implementation of the 2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism 
and Universal Access to Cyberspace, that was adopted by  the General Conference of UNESCO in 
2003.  
The current Guidelines for the fifth cycle of periodic reporting incorporates a questionnaire (see 
Appendix) which has been developed by UNESCO to facilitate the reporting process at national level. 
The questionnaire is based on the UNESCO Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use 
of Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace, 2003  and includes a set of questions to 
serve for the compilation of comprehensive baseline information on the measures taken at national 
level. The questionnaire is divided into four parts:  
1. Development of multilingual content and systems  
2. Facilitating access to networks and services  
3. Development of public domain content  
4. Reaffirming the equitable balance between the interests of rights -holders and the public 
interest  
Coordination from a range of  stakeholders might be necessary in order to cover specific provisions 
of the 2003 Recommendation.  
Reporting Obligations  
Pursuant to Articles 15 and 16.1 of the Rules of Procedure concerning recommendations to Member 
States and international conventions covered by the terms of Article IV, paragraph 4, of the 
Constitution and in conformity with 32 C/Resolution 41 of the General Conference, in February 2004, 
the Director -General transmitted to Member States a certified copy of the 2003 Recommendation.  
Under A rticle VIII of UNESCO’s Constitution, Member States are required to submit a report on the 
legislative and administrative provisions and any other measures they have taken to implement the 
conventions and recommendations adopted by the Organization. In acc ordance with the Specific 
multi- stage procedure for the monitoring of the implementation of UNESCO conventions and 
recommendations for which no specific institutional mechanism is provided, as adopted by the 
Executive Board at its 177th session (177 EX/Dec ision 35.I) and amended at its 196th session 
(196 EX/Decision 20), the frequency for submitting reports is set for an interval of four years.  
General indications  
Given the reporting obligations stated above, please describe whether the legislative, judicial, administrative or other measures that have been taken pursuant to the 2003 Recommendation and 
the extent to which national laws, policies and programmes correspond at present to its provisions.  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex – page 2 
 Information provided by Member States i n their reports should indicate how laws and practices 
comply with the commitments under the 2003 Recommendation, describing legal norms as well as 
the factual situation. The reports should thus depict the constitutional, legal and administrative 
framework  established for the implementation of the 2003 Recommendation.  
The reports should also cover laws and legislative texts adopted by Member States to promote the 
use of multilingualism and universal access to cyberspace. They should provide a description of  
policy measures and programmes implemented to that end, as well as of difficulties encountered in this process. The reports should specify activities developed and supported by Member States for 
the promotion of the 2003 Recommendation at national level.  
Please highlight the overall results achieved and the obstacles encountered in the process of the 
implementation of the 2003 Recommendation.  
Submission and Dissemination of Reports  
Please designate a contact person responsible for information sharing and c ooperation with 
UNESCO in relation to the 2003 Recommendation.  
The report should not exceed 10 pages, excluding Annexes, and is to be submitted to UNESCO preferably in electronic form (standard .pdf or .rtf or .doc format) or/and on paper in English or Fr ench.  
The reports received from Member States will be made publicly available on UNESCO’s website, in 
order to facilitate the exchange of information and lessons learnt relating to the promotion and 
implementation of the 2003 Recommendation.  
  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex  – page 3 
APPENDIX 
QUESTIONNAIRE FOR THE PREPARATION OF REPORTS BY MEMBER STATES ON THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 2003 RECOMMENDATION  
CONCERNING THE PROMOTION AND USE OF MULTILINGUALISM AND  
UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO CYBERSPACE  
GENERAL INFORMATION:  
Country:   
Title of organization(s) or entity(/ies) 
responsible for the preparation of the report 
including contact information:    
Officially designated contact person, including contact information:   
Name(s) of designated official(s) or national organization certifying the report, including 
contact information:   
List of all other designated official(s) or 
national organizations involved in the 
preparation of the report:  • Governmental organizations  
• National Commission for UNESCO  
• National Committees of intergovernmental 
programmes  
• Professional associations  
• Non-governmental organizations  
• Experts  
• Donor(s)  
• Local community(s)  
• Other (please specify)  
Provide a summary on how the consultation 
process was organized at national level for 
the preparation of the report.   
Provide information on whether the 2003 Recommendation was translated into the 
national language(s). If yes, please specify 
in which one(s).   
Reporting period (if data covers specific periods of time):   
 
  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex – page 4 
 1.  DEVELOPMENT OF MULTILINGUAL CONTENT AND SYSTEMS 
1.1  What measures have been taken to ease 
language barriers?  • Constitutional (if applicable)  
• Policy and legislative 
• Administrative  
• Financial  
• Research  
• Technological  
• Other, please provide more information:  
1.2 Has your country taken measures to 
formulate appropriate national policies 
related to languages in cyberspace?  • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
1.3 If available, please provide a list of 
languages, with reference to the official 
sources in your country, which have:  • Official status  
• Presence in cyberspace  
1.4 Has your country taken measures to 
increase availability of multilingual content 
and language descriptions (e.g. 
dictionaries, glossaries, grammar, 
statistical models, descriptions, other)  in 
digital forms (audio, video and printed 
including digital):  • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
1.5  Has your country supported a multilingual local adaptation of:  Operating systems  
• Yes 
• No 
Search engines  
• Yes 
• No 
Web browsers  
• Yes 
• No 
Online dictionaries  
• Yes 
• No 
Automated translation services  
• Yes 
• No 
Intelligent linguistic systems performing 
information retrieval/abstracting  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex  – page 5 
• Yes 
• No 
Speech recognition  
• Yes 
• No 
Other?  
1.6 Has your country taken measures to 
standardize writing system with full script 
encoding (fonts, keyboards, software and 
other)?  • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
1.7 Has your country taken measures to 
increase the level of sign language(s)’ asynchronicity
3 for a wide range of users?  • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
1.8 Have language users (speakers and signers, particularly indigenous) been 
consulted and contributed to developing 
national language related activities?  • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
1.9 Which actions has your country taken for building capacity of local communities, 
particularly indigenous, to produce and 
share multilingual content on the Internet?  • Development of regulatory policies  
• Standardization and digitization 
• Funding mechanisms  
• Introduction of new intellectual property and copyright protection measures  
• Training and skills development 
programmes/ courses  
• Development of content in different 
formats (print, digital, easy -to-use, free 
and openly licensed, and other)  
• Development of language technology, 
resources and other tools  
• Institutional support (media, information, 
library, archives, etc.)  
• Enhancement in infrastructure and 
connectivity  
• Community support  
• Partnerships, networks and professional 
communities of practice  
• Other:  
 
3  In the documentation of sign languages, the design and use of a signed video for long-term reference, repeated 
(re)viewing, searching, scrolling, heightened meta- linguistic attention and explicit structuring and for content other 
than casual conversation.  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex – page 6 
 1.10 What major initiatives, events, projects, 
publications and other actions have been 
planned, organized or launched in your 
country to promote multilingual content and 
systems during the reporting period which 
could serve as good practices?  • Short description (events, projects, 
publications, reference and other 
information)  
 
2. FACILITATING ACCESS TO NETWORKS AND SERVICES  
2.1 Has your country adopted policy measures 
to promote access to the Internet as a 
service of public interest? • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
2.2 What new incentives have been designed by your country to facilitate access to 
Internet infrastructure and devices?  • Affordable telecommunications and 
Internet costs  
• Lowering of financial barriers to the use 
of ICT, such as taxes and customs 
duties on informatics equipment, 
software and services  
• Encouragement of public -private 
partnerships  
• Special measures targeting public 
service and educational institutions, and 
of social population groups  
• Improving high- speech connectivity to 
the Internet  
• Development of open- source 
technologies  
• Other:  
2.3 Has your country taken actions to support 
development of multilingual content and 
systems on the Internet through:  • Official data collection;  
• Public outreach campaigns;  
• Public debates with policy and decision 
makers, including opinion leaders;  
• Celebration of international days, years 
and decades (e.g. International Mother Language Day on 21 February, the 2019 
International Year of Indigenous 
Languages; the International Decade of 
Indigenous Languages 2022- 2032);  
• Development of new digital tools , 
services and resources  
• Production and dissemination of 
multilingual content  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex  – page 7 
• Production and dissemination of 
accessible content for persons with 
disabilities  
• Other:  
2.4. Has your country encouraged Internet service providers (ISPs) to consider the provi sion of concessionary rates for Internet 
access in public service institutions (e.g. 
schools, academic institutions, public 
libraries, community centers located in 
remote areas, etc) ? • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
2.5.  In which of the listed international 
cooperation mechanisms and regional 
forums did your country follow up to ensure 
continuing monitoring of decisions taken:  • World Summit on the Information Society 
(WSIS)  
• United Nations Group on the Information 
Society (UNGIS)  
• Intergovernmental  Information for All 
Programme (IFAP)  
• International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC)  
• Internet Governance Forum (IGF)  
• The Broadband Commission for 
Sustainable Development  
• Governing structures related to the 2019 
International Year of Indigenous 
Languages / International Decade of 
Indigenous Languages 2022- 2032  
• Other:  
 
3. DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC DOMAIN CONTENT  
3.1.  Has your country adopted measures to give 
effect to the following provisions of the 2003 
Recommendation?  • Right of universal online access to public 
and government -held records and data, 
including in indigenous languages  
• Access to repositories of information and 
knowledge in the public domain, in 
particular persons with disabilities, 
indigenous  people, women and girls  
• Integration of ICT literacy, as well as 
media and information literacyOther, 
please provide more information.  
3.2.  What administrative and legal measures have been adopted by your country to 
ensure development of and access to 
public domain information? • Public Information Policy frameworks, 
Freedom of Information Acts and other 
laws 
• Revision of Intellectual property laws 
including those supporting community 214 EX/13.IV  
Annex – page 8 
 open access, dissemination and 
promotion of content  
• Access to public mul tilingual information 
at the community level (e.g. libraries, 
public service broadcasting organizations, 
civil society organizations and other)  
• Community -based programmes in 
indigenous and other languages  
• Financial mechanisms and grants 
schemes to support community -driven 
projects  
• Other:  
3.3.  Which institutional measures have been 
taken by your country to support enhanced 
multilingual online services, resources and tools in service institutions targeting women 
and girls, indigenous peoples, persons with 
disabilities and those living in remote 
areas?  Women and Girls:  
• Community telecentres  
• Libraries, memory institutions  
• Other:  
Indigenous Peoples and those living in 
remote areas:  
• Community telecentres  
• Libraries, memory institutions  
• Other:  
Persons with disabilities:  
• Community telecentres  
• Libraries, memory institutions  
• Other:  
3.4. Has your country strengthened, supported 
and established open repositories, open 
solutions, technical and methodological 
standards for information exchange, as well 
as online accessibility of public domain 
information on global information networks?  • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
3.5. Has your country made specific 
international cooperative arrangements in 
order to provide universal access to 
information in the public domain to count er 
geographical, economic, social or cultural 
discrimination?  • Yes.  
• Which measures?  
• No  
3.6.  Has your country taken measures to collect 
official language data using:  • National census  
• Census surveys / forms  
• Research  
• Other  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex  – page 9 
3.7. Has your country taken measures to 
strengthen the production of multilingual 
cultural information and communication in:  • Publishing  
• Sound recording and music publishing  
• Motion picture, radio, video and TV programmes  
• Information services  
• Other:  
3.8. Has your country taken measures to ensure 
digital languages usage in:  • Texting and messaging  
• Social media  
• Blogs, web pages, e -books  
• Edutainment products and services  
• E-commerce services  
• Operating systems  
• Machine translation  
• Top-level domain names  
• Other (please specify)  
3.9. Has your country taken any measures to 
produce multilingual content in line with the 
following international normative 
instruments?  • 2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of 
the Intangible Cultural Heritage  
• 2005 Convention on the Protection and 
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural 
Expressions   
• 2019 UNESCO Recommendation on 
Open Educational Resources  
• 2015 UNESCO Recommendation concerning the Preservation of, and 
Access to, Documentary Heritage 
including in Digital Form  
• 2021 UNESCO Recommendation on 
Open Science  
• 2021 UNESCO Recommendation on the 
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence  
• Other (please specify):  
3.10.  What measures have been taken to ensure 
web accessibility of multilingual public 
domain information:  • Ratification of the international normative 
instruments such as the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (2003);  
• Building web accessibility into the 
procurement procedures  
• Development and promotion of accessible 
public websites  214 EX/13.IV  
Annex – page 10 
 • Integrating web accessibility into  open 
access to scientific data, repositories and 
archives  
• Making public announcements in 
accessible formats, in particular for sign 
language users  
•  Other:  
 
4.  REAFFIRMING THE EQUITABLE BALANCE BETWEEN THE INTERESTS OF RIGHTS -
HOLDERS AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST  
4.1. Has your country taken actions (e.g. policy 
formulation) to update the national copyright legislation and its adaptation to 
multilingualism and access to information in the cyberspace?  • Yes. If yes, when:  
• No 
• Comments:  
4.2. Has your country taken steps to adhere to WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the 
WIPO Performances and Phonograms 
Treaty (WPPT)?  • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
4.3. Has your country carried out capacity building initiatives for matters related to the 
national copyright l egislation, existing 
exceptions and adaptation to multilingualism and access to information 
in the cyberspace, with a particular 
reference to indigenous peoples and 
persons with disabilities? • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
4.4. Has your country encouraged right -holders 
to release more multilingual content and 
provide access to resources using open 
licenses, particularly Open Educational 
Resources for language learning and 
training? • Yes 
• No 
• Comments:  
 
5.  APPLICATION OF THE 2003 RECOMMENDATION IN OTHER INTE RNATIONAL 
FRAMEWORKS, CHALLENGES AND FINAL SUGGESTIONS   
5.1. Has your country taken measures to 
ensure monitoring and analysis of 
progress towards the implementation of 
the International Decade of Indigenous 
Languages (2022 -2032),  in relation to the 
implementation of the 2003 Recommendation?  • Establishment of national coordination 
mechanism  
• Localization of Global Action Plan 
• Allocation of financial resources  
• Involvement in international governance 
structures (e.g. Global Task Force for 214 EX/13.IV  
Annex  – page 11 
Making a Decade of Action for Indigenous 
Languages)  
• Access to multilingual websites and social 
media channels  
• Establishment of partnerships and 
networks  
• Capacity building on the promotion and use of multilingualism and access to the 
Internet  
• Development of language technologies, open solutions, resources, tools and 
services  
• Other, please provide more information  
5.2. What measures have been taken by your 
country to provide multilingual information 
(e.g. healthcare, prevention information, 
public health announcements)  in contexts 
of global pandemic (e.g. COVID -19), 
and/or conflict and post -conflict recovery 
situations?  Please provide a brief description:  
5.3. From a national perspective, what are the main issues, new challenges and actions 
that need to be further addressed in the 
promotion of multilingualism and universal 
access to cyberspace, including the 
evolution of the Internet and its 
governance?  Please provide a brief description:  
5.4. Please share your suggestions for further promotion and application of the 2003 
Recommendation  Please provide a brief description:  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper  