GUIDELINES FOR NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS 
INSTITUTIONS (NHRIs)
I. What is The Universal
P
eriodic Review?
The UPR was established in March 2006 and has completed 
three cycles since then. It is a unique mechanism within the UN system for the periodic review of the human rights records of all 193 UN Member States. 
2 As one of the main 
features of the Human Rights Council (HRC), the UPR reformed and restructured how the UN system assesses respect for human rights. 
While aware that NHRIs cover a variety of human rights 
issues, and that they engage in the many elements that constitute their mandate, the UPR process is a unique lever to enhance visibility and impact that merits attention and investment of time. Engagement with it is a significant opportunity – within NHRI mandates – to maximize co-operation and use internationally-agreed processes to deliver on human rights protection in the country concerned. From the outset, NHRIs are in a privileged position to monitor policies that might promote and protect human rights, as well as monitor violations.
1 N ational Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs) in all regions were consulted when seeking back-
ground information for these Guidelines.  We particularly appreciate the feedback provided by the Danish Institute for Human Rights, The National Human Rights Institution of Uruguay (Institución Nacional de Derechos Humanos y Defensoria del Pueblo) and the Tanzania Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance.
2
 The basis of the review, the principles to be observed, the objectives and the modalities of the 
process were further elaborated by the General Assembly in its Resolution 5/1 on Institution Building 
of the United Nations Human Rights Council. The mechanism was further refined during the review process through resolution 16/21 and decision 17/119.
CI-2022/FEJ/UPR/1ABOUT
These UNESCO guidelines aim 
to provide practical support to National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs) on the use of the UPR process to improve freedom of opinion and expression, safety of journalists, and access to information and to strengthen their capacity to engage with the process in all its stages. 
1 
1
The Universal
Periodic Review (UPR)
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists
photo: 
Yuri Turkov/ShutterstockHow does the UPR process work? 3 
A UPR review cycle is a four-and-a-half to five-year period within which the human rights 
records of all UN Member States are reviewed.  The process provides an equal opportunity 
to all States to present the current situation regarding the respect of human rights in their 
respective countries. It ensures uniformity in the assessment process and in the decision and 
communication of recommended actions towards the States. 
The process is designed to provide technical assistance where the capacity of States and 
national institutions needs enhancement to overcome challenges. States that have utilized 
such assistance have produced good practices that they shared in their reports to the UPR, 
widely benefiting other States and stakeholders. 
The UPR is a state-driven process held under the auspices of the HRC. At the same time, 
it expands its reach beyond Governments, allowing other relevant actors to contribute, 
including civil society groups, academia and journalists. It is a universally applicable tool; 
in the same way the 2030 Agenda is.
The UPR recognizes the value of contributions by national bodies such as Parliaments 
and NHRIs. Involving NHRIs in the process at the outset increases the potential of 
implementation of recommended actions domestically. Participation in the UPR gives 
these bodies a stake in strengthening the respect for human rights at the national level and 
in ensuring that the country fares well in the process of international accountability. 
Who conducts the Review?
• The review is conducted by the UPR Working Group, consisting of the 
47 members of the Council, chaired by the President of the Council. 
• Each State review is assisted by groups of three States, known as troikas, who serve 
as rapporteurs. The selection of the troika for each State is done through a drawing 
of lots following elections for Council membership in the General Assembly. 
• The OHCHR facilitates the review process by compiling information from reports 
of UN bodies, NHRIs, civil society groups and other stakeholders, and assists the 
troikas in preparing the Final Report of the review conducted by the Working 
Group.
3 As laid down by GA Resolution 5/1, HRC Resolution 16/21 and HRC decision 17/119.The UPR will assess the extent to which States respect their human rights 
obligations set out in:
• The Charter of the  
United Nations;
• The Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights;
• Human rights instruments 
to which a State is party;
• Voluntary pledges and 
commitments made 
by States, including 
those undertaken 
when presenting their 
candidatures for election to 
the Human Rights Council; 
• Applicable provisions of 
international humanitarian 
law.THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists
2PRIOR  
TODURING  
THE  
REVIEWAFTER
THE 
REVIEWWhat does the UPR assess?GUIDELINES FOR NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS (NHRIs)
3What are the Review mechanisms?
 PRIOR: 
Preparation for the Review and reporting on implementation of recommendations 
from the previous cycle:
The documents to be prepared before the review of each state during a cycle are:
1) The National Report containing information provided by the State under review;
2) Report prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner (OHCHR) based on 
information contained in reports of the Special Procedures of the Council4, 
human rights Treaty Bodies5  and other UN Agencies;
3) Report prepared by the OHCHR based on a summary of the information provided 
by other stakeholders6 on the situation of human rights in the State under review.7 
 DURING: 
Review of the human rights situation of the State under review: 
The Review is held in Geneva and consists of a 3.5-hour interactive dialogue with the UPR 
Working Group, which is broadcast live on UN WebTV and is publicly accessible.
The Working Group and other UN Member States engage in an interactive dialogue with 
the State under review. 
• Any Member State can pose questions, comments and/or make recommendations 
to the States under review. 
• Observers8 are allowed to attend the open session of the Working Group. The 
interactive dialogue, however, is restricted to Member States only. 
• Information provided by other stakeholders can be referred to by any of the States 
taking part in the interactive discussion during the review at the Working Group 
meeting.
 AFTER: 
Outcome of the Review:
Once the review by the Working Group is completed:
1) The State either accepts a recommendation or just notes it, without any 
commitment to implement it. 
2) The outcome document lists all recommendations made by the Working Group.  
 Recommendations accepted by the State under review should be implemented 
before the next review. 
3) During the Council’s consideration and adoption of the UPR outcome, all 
stakeholders, including NHRIs and NGOs, can attend and make statements  
during the session for a comprehensive and inclusive appraisal of the review 
outcome. 
4 The special procedures of the Human Rights Council are independent human rights experts with mandates to report and advise on human rights from a 
thematic or country-specific perspective.
5 UN Charter-based bodies created under the international human rights treaties and made up of independent experts mandated to monitor State parties’ 
compliance with their treaty obligations, e.g., the Human Rights Committee to monitor compliance with International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, Committee on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, Committee on the Rights 
of the Child.
6  Stakeholders include NHRIs, NGOs, human rights defenders, academic institutions and research institutes, regional organizations.
7  OHCHR releases Technical Guidelines for the submission of stakeholders before the beginning of each UPR cycle. The OHCHR release for the 3rd Cycle 
of the UPR is attached as Annex 1. 
8 Observers include inter-governmental organizations, NHRIs and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). NGOs in consultative status with the United 
Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) can be accredited to participate in the session of the Working Group as Observers.THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists
44) There is an opportunity at this stage for the State under review to reply to 
questions and issues that were not sufficiently addressed during the Working 
Group session, and respond to recommendations that were raised by States during 
the review. 
Follow-up by reviewed States on the implementation of the conclusions and 
recommendations: 
The UPR process does not end with the review of the human rights record of a Member 
State. It is a continuous process that links the results of one review cycle to the reporting 
required from a State for the next cycle. The National Report in each of the next cycles 
contains information on progress in the areas identified for improvement by the UPR as 
well as on any developments in the field of human rights.
The State has the primary responsibility to implement the recommendations contained in 
the final outcome of a review. It is therefore imperative that States adopt or initiate measures 
for improvement in accordance with the recommendations. Other stakeholders, such as 
NHRIs, can monitor implementation by the State and also hold their own consultations on 
the best means to implement the recommendations at the national level. 
Mid-term reports:
States may, on a voluntary basis, submit UPR mid-term reports to the OHCHR with 
information on progress in implementation of the recommendations or with regard to any 
new developments that are relevant to matters discussed during a UPR cycle.  
NHRIs may submit mid-term reports to the OHCHR with respect to the review of a 
particular State, thus contributing to effective follow-up in between cycles. The list of 
midterm reports by NHRIs can be found here . 
Another way that NHRIs can actively engage with the UPR process is by advocating for the 
preparation of a mid-term report by the Government; taking stock of what has been done 
in terms of follow up to recommendations of the previous UPR cycle and of remaining 
challenges. 
Good practices: coalition building
 
The UPR process has galvanized national actors as well as international and regional 
agencies to undertake collaborative initiatives. Active co-operation of all relevant 
stakeholders in the course of drafting the parallel reports for the UPR, including mid-term 
reports, has resulted in institutionalization of NHRI and civil society engagement for the 
overall promotion of human rights in the country.
In 2016, the Tanzania Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance (CHRAGG) 
in cooperation with the national NGO Tanzania Human Rights Defenders Coalition 
(THRDC), and UPR Info (a Geneva based NGO), engaged UPR stakeholders - including 
Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), Local Government 
Authorities (LGAs), civil society organizations (CSOs), UN agencies and development 
partners - on effective implementation of the recommendations for Tanzania of the UPR 
Second Cycle.
The CHRAGG made use of UPR Info technical expertise on good practices and strategies 
to follow up implementation and monitoring of UPR recommendations in cooperation 
with MDAs, LGAs, CSOs, Development partners, and UN Agencies. In June 2016, the 
CHRAGG also held a Strategic Workshop with CSOs on the implementation of UPR 
recommendations that came up with Implementation of the Plan of Action Strategy and 
Outcome.UNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)5II. What is the role of NHRIs in the UPR process?
 
As state-mandated bodies backed by constitutional and legislative mandates, NHRIs play 
a crucial role in promoting and monitoring the implementation of international human 
rights standards at the national level. They play an important part in providing civil society 
space in oversight of the respect for human rights and the rule of law and following up to 
recommendations in between cycles. 
NHRIs have a wide scope for interventions to strengthen respect for freedom of expression, 
enhance implementation of the right to access information, reinforce protection of 
journalists and contribute towards the elimination of impunity for crimes against them.
While it is appropriate for other branches of Governments to consult with NHRIs in the 
preparation of a state’s reports to human rights mechanisms, NHRIs should neither prepare 
the country report nor should they report on behalf of the government. NHRIs must 
maintain their independence and, where they have the capacity to provide information to 
human rights mechanisms, do so in their own right.
The Paris Principles:
 
The Paris Principles9 support the role that NHRIs can play in promoting the freedom of 
expression through the UPR process. The Principles reflect that NHRIs should have powers 
to initiate inquiries and investigations, obtain documents and information from a variety 
of sources; publicize reports, findings and recommendations; and to reach out to victims or 
those who are at risk of violation of their rights, in all parts of the country. From the outset, 
the Principles grant NHRIs with venues that allow them to fight impunity, for instance by 
starting investigations on crimes against journalists and following up on the status of police 
and judicial inquiries. 
9   The Paris Principles set out the international minimum standards that all NHRIs – regardless of size or structure – must meet if they are to be legitimate, 
credible and effective in promoting and protecting human rights. They can be accessed here: https://www.un.org/ruleoflaw/files/PRINCI~5.PDF
Owing to their mandate to monitor state compliance 
with international human rights commitments, 
NHRIs play a critical role in the processes that lead 
to developing good practices for the UPR. 
photo: 
StockImageFactory.com/ShutterstockTHE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists6The Principles open different avenues for NHRIs to engage with international bodies and 
monitoring mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights. This includes 
the UN HRC and its UPR process, the Special Procedures, and the Treaty Monitoring Bodies 
of the UN. The Principles require that the mandates of NHRIs include, in the broadest 
terms, all internationally recognized human rights. The mandates of the NHRIs cannot 
be limited only to those rights that have domestic recognition or definitions. NHRIs have 
the competence to promote and protect all human rights nationally. To further emphasize 
this important role, during 2018 International Conference on “Expanding the civic space 
and promoting and protecting human rights defenders, the role of national human rights 
institutions” organized by the Global Alliance for National Human Rights Institutions 
(GANHRI), NHRIs resolved, inter alia, to use international mechanisms, including the 
UPR, to monitor and report on the situation of freedoms and civic space in their respective 
jurisdictions. This International Conference, co-organized by GANHRI members, GAHNRI 
and the OHCHR resulted in the “Marrakech Declaration” , which can be accessed here .
Because of the breadth of engagement and collaboration that the discharge of their functions 
require, NHRIs are able to play a constructive part in the shaping and the implementing of 
the UPR recommendations that are finally made to the State, including those related to the 
freedom of expression, the right to information, and the safety of journalists. 
Reprisals 
Reprisals for cooperation with the United Nations take on different forms, from travel 
bans, threats and harassment, smear campaigns, surveillance, introduction of restrictive 
legislation, physical attacks, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture and ill-treatment, 
including sexual violence, denial of access to medical attention, and even killings.  
As the Assistant Secretary-General  stated  in her 2021  report to the Human Rights 
Council, individuals from NHRIs have experienced threats and reprisals for engaging with 
the United Nations and undertaking work in accordance with their mandate. In response, 
a landmark decision by the UN Human Rights Committee in February 2021 reaffirmed 
the right of NHRIs to share information freely with the UN without reprisal.  Further, 
resolutions A/RES/76/170 of the General Assembly and resolution A/HRC/RES/12/2 
of the Human Rights Council stress that NHRIs should not be subject to any attacks as a 
result of their mandated activities, and that any such attacks should be duly investigated 
by Member States. 
All UN Mechanisms, including the UPR, have specific venues to denounce reprisals. They 
can also be reported directly to  ohchr-reprisals@un.org  to facilitate coordination and 
follow-up. Other secure channels of communication are available upon request.  Alleged 
cases and patterns can be reported throughout the year. It is important to note that in 
the context of reprisals against NHRIs, these are understood broadly and not necessarily 
linked with cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms.UNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)7III. What are the stages of engagement of NHRIs 
in the UPR process? 
Accreditation
• NHRIs planning to participate in the UPR sessions must get accreditation for 
their representative through the Secretariat of the UPR. Only organizations 
fully compliant with the Paris Principles (“ A ” status) can get accreditation to 
the HRC and therefore participate in the process.
• The process takes at least three days to be completed and for accreditation to be 
granted to the applicants.
• A useful resource is the joint chart of status of national institutions, published by 
the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions (GANHRI) and the 
OHCHR every year. The list of accreditation status as of 2021 can be found here . 
 
 BEFORE THE UPR PROCESS, NHRIs CAN:  
 ☐Build their own capacity to monitor and gather information to feed the report 
of the OHCHR on the State under review by establishing dedicated monitoring 
units and easily accessible complaints procedures within their institution. In 
this regard, designating a person to follow the process ensures consistency and 
knowledge-building;  
 ☐Keep track of the deadlines for presenting information for the Stakeholders 
report. These are published on the OHCHR’s UPR webpage;
 ☐Train the NHRI personnel to analyse data and information and to compile it in 
accordance with information and guidelines issued by the OHCHR for written 
submissions for the UPR by relevant stakeholders;
 ☐Submit parallel or shadow reports, with input from different stakeholders, and 
mid-term reports on progress in implementation of previous recommendations 
to the UPR;UNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)
Good practices: building media coverage
 
Media has a vested interest in ensuring that 
the human right to free expression, safety 
of journalists, and access to information are 
sufficiently covered in the UPR process. It is 
important to liaise with them throughout the 
process as their involvement as stakeholders 
will also increase their interest in covering the 
process. 
Moreover, media coverage of the process 
can carry the UPR beyond Geneva and make 
it accessible for the benefit of the broader 
public - the intended beneficiaries of the 
process – and not just those already involved 
or interested in the process. For these reasons, 
NHRIs can profitably engage media in relation 
to their UPR and the country engagement. 
photo: 
Oleksandr Polonskyi/ShutterstockTHE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists8 ☐Keep informed about the accreditation requirements for attending Working 
Group or the Council sessions when reviews of their respective countries are 
scheduled to take place10;
 ☐Provide assistance, when required, to the OHCHR for compiling summaries of 
information received from stakeholders and attend the Working Group Sessions 
through an accredited representative;
 ☐Encourage the Government to host a broad consultation process as an essential 
first step in the preparation of the national report, inter alia focusing on the 
status of implementation of recommendations from the previous review. 
Encourage internal consultation within the various branches of the Government 
and the participation of all relevant stakeholders in this process including the 
NHRI, NGOs and UNCTs;
 ☐Encourage parliamentary Human Rights Committees and/or MPs of relevant 
Committees to be fully aware of commitments made by the executive in the 
previous cycle – especially those requiring parliamentary action - and advocate 
for an input by Parliament into the national report being prepared for the 
review. 
 
 DURING THE REVIEW, NHRIs CAN:
 ☐Contribute to the review by submitting an independent report or information 
on a specific right, such as freedom of expression;
 ☐Organize a live streaming or recorded showing of the UPR session for all 
stakeholders to attend and a post-screening discussion of the issues raised;
 ☐Encourage significant local media coverage of the UPR working Group Session 
and the involvement of journalists, unions and associations in related events;
 ☐Prepare and make statements and participate in the Council session at which the 
Outcome Report is to be discussed and adopted.
 
According to Resolution 16/21, the national human rights institution of the State under 
review consistent with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for 
the promotion and protection of human rights annexed to General Assembly resolution 
48/134 (the Paris Principles) shall be entitled to intervene immediately after the State 
under review during the adoption of the outcome of the review by the Council plenary 
(paragraph C. 2.13). 
 ☐Encourage their State to review and accept relevant UPR recommendations, 
including, and in particular, those that may be more sensitive and where the 
State is more reticent.
 
 AFTER THE REVIEW, NHRIs CAN:
 
 ☐Engage with independent media, journalists’ associations, and human rights 
defenders (HRDs) working in this field, to involve them and to build their 
capacity to gather information and to communicate the information to National 
Mechanisms for Reporting and Follow-up (NMRFs), NHRIs and civil society 
groups;
 ☐Hold press conferences and raise public awareness on UPR recommendations 
and the means that the NHRI suggests to improve the situation;
10  Instructions issued by OHCHR regarding NHRI contributions and participation in the 3rd UPR cycle are available at 
https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/UPR/Pages/NgosNhris.aspxTHE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalistsUNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)9 ☐Publicize and disseminate the outcomes of the UPR in the country: by acting 
as a link between the international system and the national stakeholders, 
NHRIs can help implementation gain momentum at the country level. They 
can disseminate the UPR outcomes and conduct awareness raising campaigns 
on the human rights issues raised through the UPR, thus engaging civil society 
stakeholders both in the issues and the UPR process;
 ☐Mainstream UPR recommendations into their work: the work of NHRIs does 
not stop after the formal UPR session. In order to encourage progress on 
the human rights concerns raised by the UPR process, NHRIs may wish to 
include UPR recommendations into their internal work plans and draw up 
an action plan or strategy to contribute to the implementation of the various 
recommendations.
 ☐NHRIs also have a key role in advising and supporting states in implementing 
recommendations, as well as monitoring and holding to account for poor 
progress, therefore, monitoring & follow up by NHRIs should include all 
recommendations, including those that may not have been accepted by the State, 
where relevant. 
IV. What to include in a UPR contribution?
 
A research project by the Institut d’Etudes Politiques de Paris  (Sciences Po) under the 
supervision of UNESCO in 2020/2021 analysed the UPR outcomes for different States 
and found that the number of recommendations that fell under the topic of freedom of 
expression had increased slightly over the three cycles. The topics most mentioned in these 
recommendations were “laws and regulations” and “safety of journalists” .
Member States have increased their focus on enhancing norms and policies related to freedom 
of expression, including press freedom and the right to access information, online and offline, 
and on strengthening existing measures for safety of journalists. This positive trend should 
be fostered to achieve full compliance with international human rights standards.
States Parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) must 
ensure that the rights contained in the Covenant are given effect in the domestic law of the 
State. They also have an obligation to respect, protect, and promote the freedom of opinion Good practices: consultative meetings prior to the review 
A participatory process and a consultative approach in the preparatory phase of the UPR 
at the national level brings together a diverse and wider circle of those who can inform the 
national report and contributions from other stakeholders. In 2019, ahead of the 3rd UPR 
of Denmark, the DIHR participated in a meeting between civil society organizations, the 
Inter-Ministerial Human Rights Committee, and the National Mechanism for Reporting 
and Follow-up (NMRF), where participants could provide preliminary input for themes to 
be included in the national report. 
In February 2021, together with the Danish UPR coalition of CSOs, the DIHR conducted 
a consultative meeting prior to the UPR of Denmark for the diplomatic community 
in Denmark on main human rights challenges, thus preparing member states to 
constructively engage in the UPR of Denmark. Members of the Inter-Ministerial Human 
Rights Committee also participated in the meeting. 
The DIHR has also established an advisory council to the Institute which consists of 
approximately 50 representatives from civil society, public authorities and members of 
parliament.UNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists10and expression in practice, based on the principles of equality, non-discrimination and 
universality. This element should be included in the report prepared by NHRIs. 
 
Freedom of expression 
 
The right to freedom of opinion and expression is protected under international law, by the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and Article 19 of the ICCPR, amongst 
other human rights treaties. Regional human rights instruments in the Americas, Africa 
and Europe also contain specific provisions to protect freedom of expression.
Freedom of expression is a necessary condition for the realization of the principles of 
transparency and accountability11 that are central to good governance, without which 
democratic institutions and systems can neither protect and promote human rights, nor 
render legal and social justice to the people. Freedom of expression is not just a right in and 
of itself, but an enabler of multiple other human rights. 
The core components of the right to freedom of expression are:
• The right to hold opinions without interference;
• The right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless 
of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any 
other media of a person’s choice.
UNESCO is the only UN Agency with a specific mandate to foster freedom of expression 
encompassing, in particular, the promotion of “free, independent and pluralistic media in 
print, broadcast and online. ” It is also the leading UN agency in the implementation of the 
UN Plan of Action on the Safety  of  Journalists  and  the  Issue  of  Impunity , adopted by 
the UN in 2012. 
 
Attacks and intimidation against journalists
11  See General Comment No. 34 on Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
“The safety of journalists 
and the struggle against 
impunity for their killers 
are essential to preserve 
the fundamental right to 
freedom of expression, 
guaranteed by Article 19 of 
the UDHR.”
 (UN Plan of Action on the Safety of 
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity)
photo: 
 Roger.Rondon/ShutterstockUNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)11States have the responsibility to recognize and enforce respect for the freedom of 
expression. Y et, it is one of the rights that is most vulnerable to violations. Bloggers, citizen 
journalists, social media activists, and media workers that support journalists in coverage 
and dissemination of news, must equally be protected.12
• While including information about Freedom of Expression, Safety of journalists 
and access to information, UNESCO’s Observatory of Killed Journalists can be 
consulted for an overview of the killings of journalists by country and the status of 
the judicial inquiry.
The OHCHR has also developed short Guidelines on the most important elements of a 
good contribution, which can be found here.   
Ideas for building partnerships to input into UPR: 
• Encourage NGOs, and other civil society actors, to provide substantive input to 
the UPR process;
• Provide, where necessary, training and capacity building to civil society actors, 
including association of journalists and media outlets, to gather information, 
compilation of this information in accordance with the OHCHR guidelines for 
presentation in the UPR process;
• Liaise with, participate in and provide input to any activities undertaken by UNCT 
and individual UN Agencies in relation to the preparation of their submissions for 
the UPR process.
V. How can NHRIs make practical contributions 
in order to improve Freedom of Expression, 
Safety of Journalists and Access to Information?
Monitoring and national reporting:
 
NHRIs can guide the national reporting mechanisms and monitor the implementation of 
UPR recommendations by:
• Encouraging the Government to hold a wider consultation before preparing 
the UPR report and, in particular, to give public briefings on the steps taken 
12  UNESCO is the mandated UN agency to promote journalism as a means of enabling free flow of information and ideas through all kinds of media and, 
therefore, encourages definition of legal protections in connection with “acts of journalism” , rather that restricting their application to the professional func-
tions of a journalist.The National Human Rights Commission of Uruguay (INDDHH) uses the System of 
Monitoring of Recommendations (SIMORE) established by the Government to monitor 
compliance and implementation of recommendations by State institutions. This tool 
facilitates research on the human rights situation in the country, both for the INDDHH 
and for social organizations and other stakeholders. In addition, the SIMORE coordinates 
periodic meetings with representatives of the various State bodies and civil society for 
the preparation of the reports, in which the INDDHH is invited and participates as an 
observer.  In fulfilling its mandate, the INDDHH takes into account the recommendations 
of the UPR and the treaty bodies when evaluating the content of its Resolutions issued to 
the Uruguayan State. For instance in the current legislative session, the INDDHH appeared 
before a Committee of the House of Representatives and Senate Special Committee to 
give its opinion on a Media Bill as well as on freedom of expression issues in general.THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists12to implement the recommendations of the last review, stakeholders such as 
journalists, media associations and outlets, NGOs dealing with freedom of 
expression and access to information should be involved;
• Monitor the pace of implementation by maintaining an open dialogue with the 
Government Ministry or NMRF preparing the national report, in order to ensure 
that the report has taken into consideration the inputs received from stakeholders 
during the consultations; 
• Build synergies with other international reporting and monitoring mechanisms 
such as VNRs on SDG16, particularly SDG 16.10 which calls for “public access to 
information and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national legislation 
and international agreements” , and the UNESCO Director-General’s report on the 
Safety of Journalists and the Danger of Impunity;
• Advise the Government on obligations of the State under international human 
rights law and norms and recommend ratification of international treaties 
applicable to freedom of expression and the right to information;
• Submit mid-term reports to monitor progress on the implementation of 
recommendations accepted or noted by the State in the previous UPR cycle;
• Contribute to the development of good practices, sharing those recommended by 
international initiatives with Government, judicial authorities, legislators and the 
civil society actors that NHRIs engage with.
 
Preventing violations and assisting human rights compliant transformation:
 
By proactively taking initiatives that strengthen rights protection, NHRIs contribute to 
the country’s compliance with UPR recommendations. In the context of press freedom, 
NHRIs can:
• Create complaints mechanisms for journalists and media personnel and provide 
rapid response in emergencies related to threats against journalists;
• For this purpose, create mechanisms for coordination with police and relevant 
government agencies in order to combat impunity more effectively;
• Where they exist, to synergize with National Mechanisms for the Safety of 
Journalists; where they don’t exist, stimulate their creation, including as a 
recommendation withing the UPR process; 
• Promote and give guidance to the Government and to private actors on a gender-
based approach that makes justice both accessible and fair for women journalists;
• Gather and disseminate information on policies to promote the freedom of 
expression;
• Undertake training of judges, prosecutors, law enforcement officers, and 
the military to ensure their understanding of the State’s obligations under 
international human rights and humanitarian laws and the requirements of 
gender-sensitive media protection, online and offline. UNESCO has developed a 
wealth of resources for training security forces and the judiciary on freedom of 
expression.  
 
 
Recommending Laws, Policies and Practice
• Keep parliaments informed of UPR recommendations on improving freedom of 
expression; 
• Draw attention to restrictions to media freedom online and offline; UNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)13• Highlight recommended legal protections, including for the safety of women 
journalists, that may be missing in existing legal frameworks;
• Underline the central characteristic of freedom of expression and access to 
information as enablers of other rights; 
• In view of UPR recommendations, inform governments about the impact of 
existing and proposed national laws and policies on freedom of expression and the 
right to information, and make concrete recommendations to address any adverse 
implications for these rights.
 
Building partnerships for impact on UPR recommendations
 
NHRIs have a central role in creating the space for civil society engagement with the UPR 
process and in contributing to safeguarding freedom of expression. NHRIs could, therefore:  
 
• Hold joint side events with civil society during the review on the situation of 
freedom of expression in the country under review;
• Raise awareness on the UPR recommendations and seek consultation with 
relevant civil society actors in proposing measures for their implementation; 
• Initiate public debate on the means to improve the situation as recommended by 
the UPR outcome; 
• Promote multi-stakeholder cooperation for the safety of journalists in the 
performance of their duties and for eliminating impunity for crimes committed 
against them;
• Encourage the Government and all other stakeholders to submit a regular update 
or a mid-term report on the status of implementation of UPR recommendations, 
especially with respect to those that have been accepted.
 
VI. Connection with other UN mechanisms
Being an inclusive mechanism, based on cooperation and collaboration amongst a wide 
range of stakeholders, the UPR process has already established formal and informal 
connections with other monitoring exercises with a high potential for further growth in 
this direction. 
Fostering freedom of expression is  key  to  the  achievement of the 2030 Agenda’s Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), and in particular SDG 16.  
 –Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): Human Rights are central to all the SDGs 
of the 2030 Agenda and various monitoring exercises are being undertaken to track 
the progress in achieving these goals. The SDGs and UN human rights monitoring 
mechanisms complement each other’s work in feeding the UPR process. SDG 16, 
Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions, strives to “Promote peace and Inclusive 
societies foe sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build 
effective, accountable and Inclusive institutions at all levels”
 
Among the targets to achieve SDG 16 is 16.10: Ensure public access to information 
and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and 
international agreements.
The indicators to reflect compliance with target 16.10, or the lack thereof, include:THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR)  
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists1416.10.1 Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, enforced 
disappearance, arbitrary detention and torture of journalists, 
associated media personnel, trade unionists and human rights 
advocates in the previous 12 months.
16.10.2 Number of countries that adopt and implement 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public 
access to information.
 –Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) have been 
instituted to track progress on SDGs at the national 
level, are state-led, voluntary and, like the UPR, 
involve multiple stakeholders. Information published 
in VNRs, particularly on Goal 16, is an important source for determining the 
UPR outcome and recommendations on the compliance with international 
standards on freedom of opinion and expression. Compliance of States with UPR 
recommendations becomes an easier entry point for improvement in development 
goals because obligations on which Member States must report through the UPR 
process are binding, whereas the 2030 Agenda is not a legally binding instrument.
 –UNESCO Director General’s Report on safety of journalists and the dangers of 
impunity : The Report is a unique mechanism within the UN system due to its 
ongoing mandate for monitoring the killings of journalists. This mechanism has 
been called upon to reinforce collaboration with the UPR.
 –The Secretary General’s Call to Action for Human Rights, launched before the 
Human Rights Council in February 2020, makes public participation and civic space 
priority areas, and stresses the UN’s role in protecting and promoting civic space 
more consistently across the system. The value of the UPR also features prominently 
in this call. 
 
VII. Background materials and resources
 
United Nations Publications:
• UNGA Resolution 5/1: Institution-building of the United Nations Human Rights 
Council; https://ap.ohchr.org/documents/dpage_e.aspx?si=a/hrc/res/5/1
• UN Plan of Action for the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, 2012; 
https://en.unesco.org/un-plan-action-safety-journalists
• Secretary-General’s Call to Action for Human Rights (2020):  https://www.un.org/
en/content/action-for-human-rights/index.shtml
• The Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity: Report of the UN 
Secretary-General, 16 August 2019, A/74/314; https://digitallibrary.un.org/
record/3826999?ln=en
• Universal Periodic Review: Tips for Engagement at Country Level for National 
Human Rights Institutions and Civil Society; UN Human Rights, Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights. https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/
UPR/Tips_21Sept2020.pdf
• Fact Sheet No.19, National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human 
Rights, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. https://www.ohchr.
org/Documents/Publications/FactSheet19en.pdf
UNESCO Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions (NHRIs)15• Engaging Parliaments on the Promotion of Human Rights Including on the Work 
of the UN Human Rights Council and its Universal Periodic Review (UPR): Report 
of Virtual Workshop of Parliamentarians, 17-18 November, organized by the Inter-
Parliamentary Union (IPU), the Commonwealth Secretariat (ComSec) and the 
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR); 
https://www.ipu.org/event/engaging-parliaments-promotion-human-rights-
including-work-human-rights-council-and-its-universal-periodic-review-upr
• Maximizing the Use of the Universal Periodic Review at Country Level: Practical 
Guidance; UN Human Rights, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights; 
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/UPR/UPR_Practical_Guidance.pdf
• Study on emerging Good Practices from the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) by 
Miloon Kothari, June 2021; https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/UPR/
Emerging_UPR_GoodPractices.pdf
• Hand Book for the Preparation of Voluntary National Reviews, High Level forum 
of Sustainable Development, 2021 Edition; https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/
content/documents/27024Handbook_2021_EN.pdf
 
UNESCO publications:
• UNESCO Director General Report Safety of Journalists and the Danger of Impunity, 
2020; https://en.unesco.org/themes/safety-journalists/dgreport
• UNESCO: The Universal Periodic Review and its potential to foster freedom of 
expression, access to information and safety of journalists: Guidelines for United 
nations Country Teams, published in 2021; https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco-
launches-new-guidelines-country-teams-promote-freedom-expression-through-
universal
• UNESCO: Prevent and Punish: In search of solutions to fight violence against 
journalists, Background Paper 2015, Eduardo Bertoni; https://en.unesco.org/sites/
default/files/prevent-and-punish_bertoni.pdf
• UNESCO: Safety of Journalists Covering Protests; https://en.unesco.org/news/
unesco-sounds-alarm-global-surge-attacks-against-journalists-covering-protests
• UNESCO: Countering Online Hate Speech; https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco-
launches-countering-online-hate-speech-publication
Other references: 
• Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions (GANHRI). https://ganhri.
org/membership/
• The Civil Society Compendium: A Comprehensive Guide for Civil Society 
Organisations Engaging in the Universal Periodic Review, a publication by UPR 
Info; https://www.upr-info.org/sites/default/files/general-document/pdf/upr_info_
cso_compendium_en.pdf
• UPR Mid-Term Reporting: Optimizing Sustainable Implementation, Good 
practices for UPR Stakeholders, a publication by UPR Info; https://www.upr-info.
org/sites/default/files/general-document/pdf/upr_midterm_report_web_v1_high.pdf16
About the author
Hina Jilani is one of the founders of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. She was the first Special Representative 
of the UN Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders, and for the next eight years worked to empower and protect 
rights defenders worldwide. During her tenure she identified common themes in the treatment of human rights 
defenders, including the culture of impunity; intimidation and lack of security; restrictions on freedom of assembly, 
expression, and association. Ms. Jilani also founded the Women’s Action Forum  – a group set up to campaign for 
women’s rights and challenge Pakistan’s discriminatory laws. Ms Jilani has also served as a Member of the UN 
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, and was granted the Millennium Peace Prize for Women in 2001. 
These Guidelines have also been finalised in consultation with the Global Alliance of National Human Rights 
Institutions (GANHRI) and have benefited from its inputs.
Published in 2022 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France ©UNESCO. This document is available in 
Open Access under the Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) License. By 
using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of 
the UNESCO Open Access Repository. The designations employed and the presentation of 
material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or 
of its authorities, or concerning the delimation of its frontiers or boundaries. The ideas and 
opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those
of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. 
