Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information1
Promoting Gender 
Equity in the Right of 
Access to InformationPromoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information2Promoting Gender Equity in the 
Right of Access to Information
Document code: CI/UAI/2022/PI/02
Published in 2022 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France © UNESCO 2021. 
This  publication  is  available  in  Open  Access  under  the  Attribution-
ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0  IGO)  license  (creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/3.0/igo/).  By  using  the  content  of  this  publication,  the  users  accept  to  
be  bound  by  the  terms  of  use  of  the  UNESCO  Open  Access  Repository 
(en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en). 
 
The  designations employed and  the presentation of material  throughout  this pu-
blication do not  imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNE
SCO concerning the legal status  of  any  country,  territory,  city  or  area  or  of  its  
authorities,  or  concerning  the  delimitation  of  its  frontiers or boundaries.    
The ideas and opinions expressed in this policy  brief  are  those  of  the  authors;  they  
are  not  necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
About the Author 
Laura Neuman is director of the Rule of Law Program at The Carter Center. She directs 
and implements the Carter Center’s programming regarding transparency, good 
governance, and access to justice, including projects in Latin America, Africa, and Asia. 
Neuman developed the innovative access to information legislation Implementation 
Assessment Tool and the Women and the Right of Access to Information project. 
Most recently she has established and advanced the Inform Woman, Transform 
Lives campaign in 24 global cities. Ms Neuman has written several articles and book 
chapters on the right of access to information, transparency, and corruption, and has 
organized and presented at numerous international conferences. Prior to joining The 
Carter Center in August 1999, she was a staff attorney at Legal Action of Wisconsin 
and is a graduate of the University of Wisconsin Law School.
Ms Neuman developed the innovative access to information legislation Implementation 
Assessment Tool and the Women and the Right of Access to Information project. Ms 
Neuman developed the innovative access to information legislation Implementation 
Assessment Tool and the Women and the Right of Access to Information project.
Design and layout: Ludwwin EspitiaBY SAPromoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information3I. Executive summary
The importance of access to information (ATI) as an internationally 
recognised human right has long been acknowledged. However, 
the realization of this right for women remains elusive. While the 
value of information, is clear particularly for women seeking to 
promote and protect their rights and advance their economic 
empowerment, their exists legal, structural, and cultural obstacles 
that serve as important impediments.
To support women in overcoming the challenges faced in exercising 
the right to information, the international mechanisms must more 
intentionally engage the issue and national laws and policies 
developed and reviewed through a gendered lens. Promoting gender 
equity in the right of access to information will need a concerted 
effort from international organizations and national governments.
This brief comes as part of UNESCO’s work as the custodian agency 
for SDG Indicator 16.10.2 on Public Access to Information. With a 
specific focus on gender parity, the brief looks into international 
and national mechanisms to help overcome the obstacles that 
women face in exercising their right to information.Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information4II. Introduction
The right of access to information is a 
fundamental right, enshrined in Article 19 of 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In 
2013, the United Nations surveyed more than 
one million people and conducted more than 
88 national consultations to garner public 
insights on people’s priorities in building 
the “world we want” to shape consensus 
in the development of the emerging global 
development agenda. Access to information 
presented as a crucial issue and in 2015 it 
was captured as a key priority in the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development - the 
world’s shared blueprint for peace and 
prosperity - as reflected in Sustainable 
Development Goal indicator 16.10.2 on public 
access to information. 1
In November 2021, UNESCO’s 193 Member 
States endorsed the principles of the 
Windhoek +30 Declaration on Information 
as a Public Good, which highlight the 
need to address key challenges facing the 
media today, including through improved 
transparency, strengthened media viability 
and Media and Information Literacy.  
Moreover, the United Nations’ “Our Common 
Agenda, Report of the Secretary-General” 
published in 2021 recognizes information as 
a global public good and calls for a “global 
code of conduct that promotes integrity in 
public information” as a means of building 
trust and improving people’s lives.
1. This followed extensive advocacy by, inter alia, the Global 
Forum for Media Development and UNESCO under the 
mandate of its specialized Intergovernmental Programme for 
the Development of Communication (IPDC).Access to information is critical for the 
exercise of civil, political, social, and 
economic rights and is instrumental in 
improving governance, transparency, and 
accountability. It is particularly important 
for women, as it allows for more informed, 
effective decision-making regarding a wide 
range of areas such as education, land 
ownership, business opportunities, and 
health, as well as the promotion and protection 
of other rights. Access to information can 
thus enable women to participate actively 
and meaningfully in public life, advocate 
for their rights, and hold governments and 
service providers accountable. Nonetheless, 
reality remains a stark reminder of the gap 
between aspiration and practice, as the right 
of access to information remains elusive 
for most women. Despite the plethora of 
international instruments – including the 
SDGs and the impact access to information 
will have on reaching the goals - and the over 
130 countries with access to information 
laws, the benefits have not been achieved 
by many women.
This points to the need to further target 
global policy spaces to promote the 
explicit inclusion of the right to information 
for women, and to encourage national 
governments to develop and promote 
gender-sensitive access to information laws, 
policies, and implementation processes. For 
this, it is critical to identify the mechanisms 
that are necessary to strengthen and 
account for the gender dimensions of 
access to information at the global level, 
and to utilize these instruments to influence 
better national policy and implementation 
practice. This policy brief seeks to identify 
openings, actions, and levers of change at 
both the international and national levels 
that can be used to improve women’s right 
of access to information.Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information5III. Understanding 
the challenges 
facing women in 
exercising the right 
to information
It is often the vulnerable and marginalized 
populations who suffer the greatest due 
to limited access to information. This is 
particularly true for women. In many countries, 
women are limited in their full enjoyment 
of the right to information2 and its myriad 
benefits, such as economic empowerment 
and the promotion and protection of rights. 
In reflecting on the many constraints that 
women face, it is important to recognize the 
interrelatedness of these obstacles – from 
lack of time to a lack of agency - and their 
influence on women’s ability to exercise the 
right to information. It is this connectivity that 
generates such significant challenges and 
should be considered when developing the 
varied potential international and national 
responses. For example, women frequently 
face the double burden of generating income 
and carrying the main responsibility for 
unpaid domestic work, including both care 
and household chores. According to the 
United Nations “on an average day, women 
globally spend about three times as many 
hours on unpaid domestic and care work as 
men (4.2 hours compared to 1.7). In Northern 
Africa and Western Asia that gender gap is 
even higher, with women spending more 
than seven times as much as men on these 
activities.”3. The consequence of unequal 
time spent on domestic and care work 
2. See: The Carter Center studies on women and the right 
of access to information and examples from the Inform 
Women, Transform Lives campaign. 2022.
3. UN World’s Women 2020: Trends and Statisticshas been that, for 2020, it was estimated 
that “only 47% of women of working age 
participated in the labour market, compared 
to 74% of men – a gender gap that has 
remained relatively constant since 1995”4  
While women perform most of the world’s 
work, as of 2017, they continue to form the 
largest block of the world’s 696 million billion 
people living in poverty.5 “Women represent 
a majority of the poor in most regions and 
among some age groups,”6 and updated 
figures estimate that the COVID-19 pandemic 
resulted in an additional over 100 million people 
living in extreme poverty.7
While over the past decades, enrolment of girls 
in primary education has increased, it still is far 
from universal. Before COVID-19, “the primary 
enrolment rate of girls over the past 25 years 
has only increased ten percentage points from 
78 percent to 88 percent, less than half a point 
per year”8 And in ten countries “the poorest girls 
spend less than 2 years in school on average.”9  
As with many other indicators, COVID-19 has 
had a particularly destructive impact on girl’s 
education, with projections suggesting that 
“11 million girls might not return to school.”10 
Moreover, women make up more than two-
thirds of the world’s illiterate people.11
Further, women continue to be impacted 
by high rates of sexual and gender-based 
violence. According to the World Health 
Organization, “[a]cross their lifetime, 1 in 3 
women, around 736 million, are subjected 
to physical or sexual violence by an intimate 
partner or sexual violence from a non-
partner – a number that has remained largely 
unchanged over the past decade.”12 This lack 
of agency reflects in all aspects, including 
women’s exercise of the right to information.
4. Id
5. March 2021 global poverty update from the World Bank; 
World Population Review 2021 
5. Understanding Poverty 2018, The World Bank
7. Id
8. HerEducationOurFuture: keeping girls in the picture during 
and after the COVID-19 crisis; the latest facts on gender 
equality in education, UNESCO 2021
9. Id
10. Id
11. Gender and extreme poverty, Getting to Zero: A USAID 
discussion series, 2015
12. Devastatingly pervasive: 1 in 3 women globally experience 
violence, World Health Organization, March 9, 2021; UNESCO’s 
research shows pervasive online violence against women, 
inhibiting their right to both impart as well as seek and receive 
information. See The Chilling: Global trends in online violence 
against women journalists, 2021Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information6Finally, according to Transparency International, women “experience corruption 
in different ways than men, due to power imbalances and to the difference in 
participation in public versus domestic life. In addition, women (particularly poor 
women) often have fewer resources to use informal payments to access services 
or circles of influence and can be more frequently “denied” access to services 
because of their inability to pay bribes.”13 As such, women are more susceptible to 
and affected by corruption, which flourishes with greater secrecy.
Over the course of three years, the Carter Center14 undertook a study in Bangladesh, 
Guatemala and Liberia, to assess the hypothesis that women are not able to 
exercise the right to information with the same facility (frequency, ease, and rate 
of success) as men. Where this inequity was reported, the study also identified the 
reported cultural, structural, and legal barriers that women face which impedes 
access to public information. Local researchers conducted interviews of more than 
1,600 community leaders, experts, government officials, and citizens and visited 139 
public agencies.15 The findings were notable and consistent across each country, 
with the data indicating an asymmetry of information flows based on gender. 
In assessing the obstacles facing women in the three countries, the research 
found that women are challenged by: 
Notably, when the Carter Center researchers asked women about their interest in 
public information, there was unanimity in their desire for information and a clear 
understanding of its value for accessing government services and support, such 
as safety-net benefits, training, income-generating opportunities, loans, housing, 
education, and health care. Information can help improve the lives of women by 
enhancing their resilience, economic empowerment, and, in cases where they 
have been subject to violence, their recovery.
13. Gender and Corruption Topic Guide, Transparency International, 2016
14. The Carter Center is a non-governmental organization headquartered in Atlanta Georgia. It was founded 
in 1982 by Jimmy Carter, former President of the United States of America and “helps to improve lives by 
resolving conflicts, advancing democracy, and preventing diseases”. 
15. See: The Carter Center, Women and the Right of Access to Information in Liberia, 2014; The Carter Center, 
Mujeres y el Derecho de Acceso a la Información en Guatemala, 2015; The Carter Center, Women and the Right 
of Access to Information in Bangladesh, 2016 Poverty
Lack of awareness of the right to information and where/how to make 
requests to access information;
Cultural constraints, including someone in the family is not 
supportive/impedes women’s access;
Lack of mobility and time;
Negative mindset of public officials/poor treatment in public office;
Language.Fear, including fear of asking for information, physical violence, 
threats, retaliation for making requests, and dangers related to 
women in public spaces;?Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information7IV. Towards 
solutions: 
international 
mechanisms
International instruments, reports, platforms 
and meetings offer an opportunity to advance 
women’s right of access to information. 
International policy can also serve to 
shape national action. Most international 
mechanisms have been relatively silent 
regarding the explicit inclusion of women’s 
fundamental right of access to information. 
In general, where these instruments have 
included access to information, it has 
been limited to the issues of reproductive 
rights or information and communication 
technology. For women to benefit more fully 
from their right of access to information, the 
international mechanisms must recognize 
the gender aspect of the human right and as 
a foundation for the exercise of other rights, 
participation, and economic empowerment.  
This means explicitly including it in the 
discourse and instruments as well as 
promoting better oversight and reporting.
A. Conventions 
for gender equality
In terms of international instruments, one of 
the main drivers for gender equality is the 
Convention for the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), 
and the Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW Committee), comprised of independent 
experts, that monitors its implementation.16  
Women’s right of access to information is 
not mentioned in the Convention, other than 
related to reproductive rights. However, this 
right also is critical to implementing other 
articles of the Convention including, but not 
limited to, the right to participate in public 
and political life (Article 7), areas of economic 
and social life (Article 13), and the rights of 
rural women (Article 14).
In addition to its consideration of country 
reports, the CEDAW Committee publishes 
general recommendations that provide 
guidance on the content of the legal 
obligations of States Parties under the 
Convention. While general recommendations 
are normally based on specific provisions 
of the Convention, the Committee also may 
consider themes/issues that are relevant to 
the provisions of the Convention and can 
adopt statements “to clarify and confirm its 
position with respect to major international 
developments and issues that have a bearing 
on the implementation of the Convention.”17 
Considering the principal role that the 
CEDAW Committee plays, it could take the 
lead on promoting women’s right of access 
to information in several ways. For example, 
the Committee could be engaged to develop 
and adopt a general recommendation on 
women’s right of access to information.  
This could serve to lay the groundwork 
for a future revision to the Convention 
itself to include women’s right of access to 
information and to encourage the inclusion 
of access to information in shadow reporting 
by civil society in terms of the Convention’s 
implementation. Moreover, once a general 
recommendation on women’s access to 
information is adopted, the relevant UN 
agencies can provide additional support 
by producing evidence and knowledge and 
assisting in its implementation.
16. See: Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women 2021
17. See; Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Women, 2021Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information8B. Commission on the 
Status of Women
The Commission on the Status of Women 
(CSW) offers another opportunity to advance 
women’s right to information. The CSW is the 
“principal global intergovernmental body 
exclusively dedicated to the promotion of 
gender equality and the empowerment of 
women.” It is a functional commission of the 
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and 
is responsible for monitoring and reviewing 
the progress of the Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action.18 
The Commission conducts an annual two-
week session to measure progress and 
identify gaps in the implementation of the 
Beijing Declaration, as well as emerging 
issues related to gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. Sessions are 
attended by representatives of UN Member 
States, civil society organisations, and UN 
entities. Member States agree on actions to 
accelerate progress on women’s political, 
economic, and social rights. Outcomes 
and recommendations following each 
session are submitted to the UN Economic 
and Social Council (ECOSOC) to ensure 
follow up. The CSW could, therefore, 
submit recommendations to the ECOSOC 
18. The Beijing Declaration and Plan for Action was developed 
as part of the Fourth World Conference in Beijing (China) 
in 1995 and is a roadmap for advancing women’s rights and 
assuring gender equalityCommission to give attention to women’s 
right of access to information, an issue which 
could be developed as an important agenda 
item for the CSW, notably as an emerging 
issue/focus area or as a priority theme for the 
annual session, and inform the organization 
of experts panels. 
C. Special Procedures of 
the Human Rights Council
Utilizing the Special Procedures of the Human 
Rights Council (HRC) can be another effective 
means to raise awareness of women’s right of 
access to information and of the gendered 
asymmetries in information flows, as well as to 
identify areas of discrimination and advance 
good practices in assuring women’s effective 
and impactful right. The HRC Procedures 
consist of experts who are empowered to 
conduct studies, raise awareness of human 
rights issues, facilitate dialogue and coalition 
building, and “contribute to the development 
of international human rights standards” and 
“legislative and policy reform.”19 
The Special Procedures include 45 thematic 
special rapporteurs and 13 country mandates, 
which are often viewed as being among 
the most accessible UN human rights 
mechanisms. They also are often the first 
mechanism to highlight emerging issues and 
situations and can contribute jointly to issues 
19. See: Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council, 
2020
Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information9that cut across a range of human rights. 
The Coordination Committee established 
in 2005, seeks to facilitate coordination 
amongst the mandate holders, such as by 
“proactively identifying issues of concern 
to groups of mandates and facilitating joint 
action on cross cutting issues or issues of 
shared concern.” Mandate holders may also 
coordinate their work at annual meetings 
where they exchange views with States, civil 
society organisations, representatives of other 
UN entities, including the UN Human Rights 
Office (OHCHR) bodies, etc. Mandate holders 
have previously jointly addressed thematic 
issues such as the impact of new technologies, 
the SDGs, migration and climate change. 
A joint thematic report or statement on 
women’s right of access to information 
could be supported by the following 
mandate holders:20 
Special Rapporteur on the promotion 
and protection of the right to 
freedom of opinion and expression;
Special Rapporteur on the right to 
development;
Special Rapporteur on violence 
against women, its causes, and 
consequences;
Special Rapporteur on extreme 
poverty and human rights.
Another potential area for entry – again 
utilizing the Special Procedures of the HRC 
- is the Working Group on Discrimination 
against Women in Law and Practice, which 
was established by HRC in 2010. In 2019, 
this mandate was renewed, and its name 
was changed to the Working Group on 
Discrimination against Women and Girls. The 
Working Group is authorized to “report and 
advise on human rights from a thematic or 
country specific perspective.” It consists of 
five experts who meet three times a year and 
reaches out to a range of stakeholders to 
inform its thematic priorities.
20. Please note that this list is not exhaustive.The Working Group reports to the HRC and 
the UN General Assembly each year and 
participates in the annual session of the 
CSW. It has previously produced reports 
on sexual and reproductive rights (2021), 
women’s rights in the changing world of 
work (2020), and women deprived of liberty 
(2019). A thematic report published by the 
Working Group on the right of access to 
information from a gender perspective could 
serve to highlight the issue and influence 
other international mechanisms to prioritize 
women’s right of access to information. 
D. High-Level Political 
Forum on Sustainable 
Development
The High-Level Political Forum on 
Sustainable Development (HLPF), 
established in 2012, serves as a follow-
up and review mechanism of the efforts 
towards achieving the SDGs. The Forum 
meets annually, as part of the ECOSOC. 
The HLPF adopts inter-governmentally 
negotiated political declarations and relies 
on the participation of other stakeholders 
to provide expertise. In the context of the 
HLPF, Major Groups (MGoS) provide civil 
society a structured platform to contribute 
to intergovernmental processes for 
sustainable development. At present, there 
are nine official MGoS, including a Women’s 
Major Group (WMG). 
The WMG seeks to “facilitate the 
participation of women in UN processes on 
Sustainable Development” and is “open to 
any interested group.”21 The WMG develops 
policy positions, background papers and 
factsheets on issues relevant to sustainable 
development negotiations. It prepares 
a formal input to the HLFP each year, 
participates through interventions and side 
events, and advocates evolving positions 
with delegates through representation 
at the HLPF. The WMG is an important 
mechanism to ensure that women’s right of 
access to information continues to feature 
prominently on the sustainable development 
21. See Women’s Major Group 1996Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information10and trainings on women’s right of access to 
information, as well as other initiatives like 
special events or forums. A special focus on 
the gender dimension of access to information 
could be promoted during the celebration of 
the International Day for Universal Access to 
Information, whose global observance is led 
by UNESCO. Moreover, including the issue of 
women’s access to information on the agenda 
of the Inter-Agency Network on Women and 
Gender Equality (IANWGE)23 would further 
help elevate this topic in the UN system 
agenda. A coordinated effort by relevant 
UN entities to advocate for and strengthen 
women’s right of access to information at 
the international level could also lead to 
this becoming a priority issue for the other 
international mechanisms highlighted above, 
as well as at the national level.
Likewise, UNDP’s critical work on access 
to information within its anti-corruption 
agenda, through its core work on 
Governance and more specifically under the 
Transparency and Anti-corruption team24, 
could - working in coordination with its 
Gender Teams - further mainstream gender 
into the relevant programming. UNDP could 
also consider including access to information 
in their Gender Equality Strategy, which 
guides their work on gender and identifies 
potential entry points.25
23. Partnerships for Gender Mainstreaming within the UN 
System | How we work: UN system coordination: Gender 
mainstreaming | UN Women 2021
24. https:/ /www.undp.org/expertise 2022
25. United Nations Development Programme Gender Equality 
Strategy 2018-2021,agenda. Goal 5 related to Gender Equality 
and Goal 16 related to Peace, Justice and 
Strong institutions are both relevant to 
women’s right of access to information. 
The WMG can play an important role in 
identifying and advocating for synergies 
between these two goals and encourage an 
increased understanding and emphasis on 
women’s right of access to information and 
its value for meeting the SDG’s.
E. United Nations entities
Systematic mainstreaming of the topic of 
women’s access to information into the 
existing programming at all relevant UN 
agencies, programmes and funds, and through 
UN interagency coordination, will support the 
strengthening of a gender dimension within 
the work to safeguard and promote the right 
of access to information at the international 
level. Several of these UN entities, such as UN 
Women, UNESCO, and the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), already 
engage in important work in the fields of 
women’s empowerment and sustainable 
development, and their commitments could 
be further harnessed to promote women’s 
access to information. For example, UN 
Women’s focus areas, including women’s 
economic empowerment, women’s leadership 
and political participation, ending violence 
against women, and governance and national 
planning, offer an opportunity to incorporate 
the value of information, thus highlighting its 
importance and the need to enhance efforts 
to promote this right worldwide, including 
through UN Women’s country offices. UN 
Women could be encouraged to include 
the advancement of the right of access to 
information in their strategic plan.
UNESCO is the designated UN agency 
custodian of SDG indicator 16.10.2 on public 
access to information and has broader 
cooperation agreements with UNDP, OHCHR, 
and UN Women.22 Ongoing coordination 
in the field of access to information could 
be supported through various joint activities 
such as campaigns, policy briefs, guidelines 
22. UNESCO, Partnerships with other agencies 2021. 
See also: UNESCO and OHCHR strengthen cooperation to 
advance human rights, 2019. Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information11V. Recommendations: 
international mechanisms
1. The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW 
Committee) could publish a general recommendation or statement on 
women’s right of access to information
2. The Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) could consider:
a.  Including women’s right of access to information in the final statements 
and as part of the proceedings through expert panels
b. Designating “women’s right of access to information” as an emerging 
issue and/or priority theme at a future annual session
3. The UN Special Procedures could be mobilized to advance women’s right 
to information through:
a. The Working Group on Discrimination against Women and Girls 
publishing a thematic paper on women and the right of access to 
information
b. The Working Group considering the issue during country visits and 
when making recommendations
c. Relevant mandate-holders publishing a joint thematic report/
statement on women’s right of access to information
4. The Women’s Major Group for the HLPF could publish annual position papers 
including a section dedicated to women’s right of access to information
5. UN agencies, programmes and funds could further engage to advance 
women’s right to information through:
a. Mainstreaming women’s right to information into existing programming 
and focus areas
b. Developing joint actions, such as publications, events, and forums
c. Including the issue in the work/deliberations of the Inter-Agency 
Network on Women and Gender EqualityPromoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information12be discriminatory, but in practice can hinder 
women’s access, are removed or amended. 
Illustrative cases are provided below. Where 
possible, the aspiration should be access 
to information laws which are gender 
sensitive at minimum or better yet – gender 
transformative27, seeking to affirmatively 
support and enable women’s exercise of the 
right to information, transform gender roles 
and create more gender equal relationships 
and the empowerment of women.
A. Gender review of Right 
to Information Laws and 
practice
A gender review of a right to information 
law should engage various stakeholders, 
including government officials, civil society 
leaders, and gender experts, to consider each 
of the provisions through a gender lens and 
whether in practice the current formulation of 
the legislation may have a negative or chilling 
effect on women’s exercise of the right to 
information. This could include provisions such 
as the necessity to make requests in writing 
and/or in person, fees that would preclude 
persons without the necessary means, or the 
need to show an identification card, which 
some women may not have. In reviewing the 
law, the stakeholders should consider which 
sections/areas would benefit from greater 
gender-sensitization, reflecting on issues such 
as: gendered language, request procedures, 
access, literacy, ability to pay, priorities within 
proactive disclosure, etc. An example of this 
type of assessment can be found in Canada’s 
Gender-based Analysis Plus (GBA+) which 
mandates that every policy must be reviewed 
through an established process “to assess 
how different women, men and gender 
diverse people may experience policies, 
programs and initiatives.”28
Moreover, attention should be given to how 
the access to information law has been 
implemented and its practice and what areas 
could be made more gender-sensitive. For 
27. Gender-transformative laws actively seek to change gender 
norms and imbalances of power. Examples of provisions 
that are gender-transformative may include quotas, special 
concessions for women, gender-based budgeting etc. 
28. Government of Canada Gender-based Analysis Plus 2021VI. Towards 
country level 
solutions: national 
mechanisms
Right of access to information laws and their 
practice play a critical role in promoting a 
meaningful right of access to information for 
women. Considering the identified obstacles 
facing women in the exercise of the right 
to information, including, but not limited to 
fear, poverty, lack of awareness of where and 
how to ask for information, lack of time and 
mobility, the digital divide, as well as cultural 
barriers, it is paramount that national laws 
and implementation practice are designed to 
address these challenges.
For the most part, access to information laws 
are gender-neutral26, though there may be 
examples of explicit discriminatory provisions. 
While gender-neutral laws are meant to do 
no harm in the framing of the legislation, 
they do not respond to the gender-specific 
needs of individuals. By not acknowledging 
or addressing the gender dynamics inherent 
in many parts of the world when it comes to 
the right to access information, the result of 
gender-neutral legislation, keeping ‘status 
quo’, is that many women remain excluded 
from enjoyment of the right and its benefits. 
Therefore, it becomes imperative that access 
to information laws be drafted and reviewed 
through a gender-lens, with a focus on 
assuring gender-sensitivity at a minimum, 
so that provisions which on paper may not 
26. Gender-neutral laws are drafted in “universal terms, 
ignoring gender-specific situations and power relations 
between women and men that underpin sex-and gender-
based discrimination”. For more information, see: European 
Institute for Gender Equality, gender-neutral legislation | 
European Institute for Gender Equality (europa.eu).Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information13example, there could be gender-sensitization 
training for information officers, placement 
of information where women can more 
easily access it, and increased emphasis on 
awareness-raising of the right to information 
and how it can be exercised.
A second review of the law and practice can 
be used to identify areas ripe for gender 
transformative provisions. The review could 
identify whether there are specific measures in 
the access to information law that guarantee 
women’s equitable access to information, and, 
if not, what could be included. Consideration 
could be given to explicitly making assistance 
for women requesters available, directing 
information to be provided in areas most 
accessible to women, or including at least one 
woman on the oversight body such as the 
Information Commission. 
The need to assure gender transformative 
access to information laws is clear from 
the low percentages of requesters that are 
women and the scant number of women that 
appeal against denials of requests. According 
to the findings of a questionnaire sent to 
Information Commissions in November 2021 
through the International Conference of 
Information Commissioners (ICIC), of the 
18 national responses and 6 subnational, 
men were requesting information more 
frequently than women – in some countries, 
as much as 75% of requests were submitted 
by men. This unevenness may be the same 
across the countries, however none of these 
have statutory provisions requiring the 
disaggregation of data by sex.
B. Addressing obstacles to 
accessing information
Obstacles to access, such as those found in 
the Carter Center studies and those identified 
by the International Conference of Information 
Commissioners (ICIC) questionnaire,29 
may play a role in the asymmetry. These 
29. Information Commissions noted a number of challenges 
that women face in exercising the fundamental right to 
information, such as lack of awareness of the law, illiteracy, 
cultural norms, lack of internet access (and that much of the 
public information is placed on the internet), lack of mobility, 
and language barriers.challenges could be addressed through 
greater intentionality related to gender in the 
law and its practice. For instance, as one of 
the main challenges identified to women’s 
access to information is illiteracy and – thus – 
difficulties completing the request forms, the 
law could require assistance for requesters 
in need, including for women and those with 
special needs. In the ICIC questionnaire sent 
to the oversight bodies, ten indicated that 
their law mandates support for illiterate 
persons, but eight do not. Similarly, distance 
to the public agency can be an incredible 
challenge for women who are faced with the 
double burden of unpaid care responsibilities 
and lack of cash income. Yet, of the 18 persons 
responding, only 6 indicated that their laws 
allow for requests by phone, a medium that is 
more accessible to women. Notably, 17 out of 
18 allow for request via internet, which allows 
for easier request making, but only for those 
with access to the internet. Unlike allowing 
for phone requests, placing emphasis on the 
internet can exacerbate the inequities caused 
by the existing digital divides. Positively, in 
ten of the national laws there is the mandate 
to provide information in languages other 
than the official language.
Lack of awareness of the right to information 
or where/how to make requests presented 
as a major challenge facing women. In 
another study conducted in Latin America, 
when asked about their knowledge of their 
national access to information law, means of 
accessing information and the government’s 
transparency portal, it was reported that 
“men in Chile were more knowledgeable 
than women (26% compared to 19% of the 
people consulted), also in Uruguay (36% 
compared to 32%), as well as in Mexico (68% 
compared to 53%). ”30
While public outreach related to access 
to information – and in particular to 
women - could be included as a statutory 
requirement, it is more likely to be 
successful as an implementation practice. 
Utilizing communication methods that 
more successfully reach women, such 
as radio, street dramas, town hall 
30. Eurosocial Tool, Incorporating a gender focus in 
transparency and access to information systems and policies 
in Latin America, 2021Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information14meetings, and information booths, and 
coordinating with relevant ministries and 
civil society organizations could reduce 
the awareness gap, as well as encourage 
women’s participation in seeking 
and using information.
C. Gender parity 
In terms of gender parity, six of the 18 
Information Commissions reported that 
their national laws require that at least 
one of the Information Commissioners is a 
woman. For instance, in the ICIC research, 
Bangladesh Right to Information law, 2009 
states that “The Commission shall consist 
of the Chief Information Commissioner 
and two other Commissioners, at least one 
whom shall be a woman.”31 
The situation for women serving as 
designated information officers is varied. 
Of the 24 responses to the questionnaire, 14 
said that information on the gender of public 
officials serving as designated information 
officers is not collected while two indicated 
the gender breakdown within the oversight 
body. Of the remaining eight, three said that 
the position was held equally by men and 
women and in the rest, it ranged from the 
majority being women, to 80% being men. 
Assuring greater gender balance in decision-
making and as designated information 
providers is important both for the value of a 
diversity of perspectives and as women have 
indicated fears in requesting information and 
experiences of dismissive public officials.
D. Gender disaggregation 
in proactive disclosure 
Cognizant of the need to address the gender 
dimension, the Organization of American 
States (OAS) in its 2020 Inter-American 
Model Law 2.0 on access to information  
engaged gender in a number of key sections, 
noting that it was “the first legal instrument 
of the of the Inter-American System to 
incorporate this perspective by design.”32 
Throughout the Model Law 2.0 there 
31. Bangladesh Right of Access to Information Law,
2009 sec. 12
32. Inter-American Model Law 2.0 on Access to 
Information, 2021are a variety of provisions that mandate 
disaggregation of data by gender, including 
related to specific classes of proactively 
disclosed information, number of requests 
and appeals, and – more broadly – “gender-
disaggregated statistics and information 
demonstrating compliance with this Law.”33  
While, this may be the ideal, as noted above 
it rarely presents in existing laws.
Notable in the model law is the emphasis 
on proactive disclosure, both in terms of 
how information is disclosed as well as the 
type of information. 
The OAS Model Law 2.0 it stipulates proactive 
disclosure classes, including information 
needs of specific groups. Article 6 (E) states 
that the following information should be 
proactively disclosed:
a. relevant information needed to promote 
greater gender equity such as calculation 
of the salary gap, information on existing 
programs benefiting women, statistics 
or indicators related to labour inclusion, 
health, and other aspects.
b. relevant and necessary information 
on social programs intended to meet the 
needs of other specific groups of society 
such as minors, seniors, afro-descendants, 
the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender 
and intersex (LGBTI) community and the 
members of indigenous communities, as 
well as persons with disabilities.
c. detailed information on indicators of 
progress and statistics that can be used to 
verify compliance in the implementation 
of gender equity, as well as on meeting 
the needs of other specific groups of 
society, including the impact generated 
for such groups.
Related to content of information proactively 
disclosed, 19 of the respondents in the ICIC 
research said that information/data regarding 
social programs (benefits and allowances, 
health, education) is proactively disclosed.  
However, only 11 said that information/data 
related to sexual and gender-based violence 
is proactively disclosed. In considering 
33. Id. Article 65, 1 (j)Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information15access to information, the substance of the 
information – i.e. the value that it will have 
for women – may be as important as where 
it is placed or how easily it is accessed.
When queried about placement of 
information, it emerged that in half of the 
cases, the law does not mandate information 
disclosed through proactive disclosure to 
be placed anywhere other than the internet, 
a platform that may be less available to 
women. Peru’s access to information law 
establishes other locations for the agency 
to share information, which may be more 
accessible to the greatest number of people. 
In Article 21 it states that “The publication of 
the information referred to in this law may be 
made through the entities’ Internet portals, 
or through the major newspapers circulation 
in the localities, where they are located, as 
well as through other means according to the 
infrastructure of the locality.”
Finally, 40% of the persons responding to the 
ICIC questionnaire said that the government 
had taken measures to be gender-sensitive 
regarding access to information. Examples 
of these efforts included plans of action 
with a gender perspective, agreements to 
work with ministries responsible for women’s 
rights and/or gender-related issue to reduce 
the gaps and to provide awareness raising, 
and reviews of relevant policies to assure 
that they are gender-sensitive. Similarly, ten 
respondents answered in the positive that 
the Information Commission/Oversight Body 
has taken measures to promote and protect 
women’s right of access to information 
through activities such as gender-based 
orientation programs, invitations to 
women’s organizations to participate in the 
Commissions public outreach, and gender 
mainstreaming in their policies. 
E. Data disaggregation
Notable in the research and consideration of 
women and the right of access to information 
is the lack of data disaggregated by sex. This 
is true both for the public information that 
is being disclosed as well as the exercise 
of the right, i.e. how many requesters are 
women, what is the rate of denial for women 
versus men, etc. While Mexico’s Federal Law on Transparency and Access to Information 
does not mandate statistics relating to the 
practice of the right to be disaggregated by 
sex, it does include a number of documents 
to be disclosed with disaggregated data.  
Examples include “The criminal incidence 
of the federal jurisdiction, disaggregated 
by type of crime, as well as the number of 
victims disaggregated by gender and age 
range” and a list of agricultural supports with 
the beneficiaries distinguished by gender.34 
A report on Latin America, commissioned 
by Eurosocial “identifies gaps with respect 
to the production and dissemination of data 
disaggregated by sex and on gender”35 and 
provides a few examples of good practices 
that can be applied to overcome this breach.36
F. Gender commitments
To encourage greater gender-sensitivity 
in access to information laws and practice, 
governments participating in the Open 
Government Partnership (OGP) could 
consider gender-specific commitments. OGP 
is a voluntary compact of 78 countries and 76 
local governments to be more transparent, 
accountable, and participatory. Through a 
co-creation process, these governments 
make a series of commitments. In 2020, 31 
OGP members made “127 commitments 
that include women or gender perspectives, 
but this still only reflects three percent of 
the total number of OGP commitments.”37  
This number has increased in 2021 to 48 
members and almost 150 commitments 
related to gender and inclusion. Some 
relevant commitments have included 
improved implementation of freedom of 
information laws, with a focus on gender, 
gender inclusion in access to information, 
enhanced proactive disclosure and, including 
information on gender-based violence. The 
inclusion of access to information with a 
gender focus in OGP commitments serves 
to elevate awareness, allow for peer-to-peer 
learning across members, and encourage 
greater advancements. 
34. Ley Federal de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información 
Publica, 2001, Art. 69
35. Id
36. Derecho de acceso a la información e igualdad de 
género: Una reflexión desde Europa, Herramientas 
Eurosocial, Nº 13,  2020
37. See: Open Government Partnership 2021Promoting Gender Equity in the Right of Access to Information16VII. Recommendations:
national laws and practice
1. Promote gender-sensitive Right to Information (RTI) laws, including:
a. Reviewing of RTI legislation through a gender-lens, including assuring 
at minimum gender-neutral language and gender-sensitivity, with the 
ideal of a gender-transformative approach
b. Mandatory support for requesters, with specific reference to persons 
that may be illiterate, functionally literate, or speak different languages
c. Incorporating a reduction of fees for search, retrieval and reproduction/
copying of documents based on hardship 
d. Explicitly listing information most critical for women in proactive 
publication schemes
e. Gender parity within the Information Commissions to encourage 
a diversity of opinion and model the value of women’s access to 
information
 
2. Access to Information practices should be gender-sensitive, including: 
a. Increasing women’s awareness of the right to access information 
and how to exercise it, including through radio, town hall meetings, 
information booths and/or engagement of civil society organizations
b. Placing proactively disclosed information in locations where women 
can best and most easily and safely access it
c. Disaggregating data by sex, such as number of women requesters, 
number of women denied information, and number of women that 
appeal denials
d. Assuring gender balance in the number of designated information 
officers to ensure representativity and encourage women requesters 
e. Developing and implementing mandatory gender-sensitivity trainings 
on the topic of access to information for relevant public officials
f. Providing specific support to women that are denied information, to 
ensure they are aware, equipped, and able to appeal such denials
e. Encouraging an increase in data to be disaggregated by gender 
and ensuring the inclusion of specific sections on women’s right to 
information in annual reports
3. Development of a comprehensive strategy, plan of action and accompanying 
dedicated budget to ensure that RTI is equitable, including engaging 
with the ministries responsible for women’s rights/gender/family/youth, 
other ministerial gender units and Human Rights bodies/ Ombudspersons 
4. Encourage Open Government Partnership Commitments to include 
national and subnational actions to advance an equitable right of access 
to information for all women