GUIDANCE NOTE FOR MEMBER 
STATES ON DRAFTING UPR RECOMMENDATIONS
The Universal
Periodic Review (UPR):
Model recommendations in the 
field of freedom of expression, 
safety of journalists and access  
to information 
This note provides suggestions for Member States on how to 
word the recommendations for the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information. The background and recommendations below can also assist UN Country Teams, National Human Rights institutions (NHRIs) and civil society in relation to UPR submissions and follow up.ABOUT THIS GUIDANCE NOTE
2022/FEJ/UPR/2 REV. THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR):  
model recommendations in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information 
Foreword 
 
On the occasion of World Press Freedom Day 2022, we issued a joint statement on the safety 
of journalists, recalling the essential role played by media workers in ensuring access to 
information for all and in advancing human rights, sustainable development, and peace. 
The joint statement, found in the annex of this document, was issued within the framework of a 
global celebration of press freedom, which, over the course of several days, also called attention 
to the multiplicity of challenges that freedom of expression in general and media freedom 
in particular continue to face worldwide, both online and offline.  In light of the situation of 
media freedom and safety of journalists globally, the Universal Periodic Review is a critical tool 
to uphold freedom of expression and access to information.
This unique and universal mechanism within the United Nations system is driven by Member 
States, and thus has an equally outstanding potential to help enhance freedom of expression, 
access to information and the safety of journalists. We therefore encourage Member States to 
fully engage in this process and to articulate and strengthen their recommendations on the 
aforementioned issues, an endeavour for which we believe the present document will prove 
useful. 
This guidance note for Member States was prepared by the Secretariat of UNESCO. As an 
informal guideline, it is also a valuable resource to respond to the UN Secretary-General’s 
Call to Action for Human Rights, the fourth thematic area of which, on “Public Participation 
and Civic Space ” , particularly underlines the importance of freedom of expression, media 
freedom and access to information and encourages the full use of human rights mechanisms, 
including the Universal Periodic Review, as a basis for meeting the challenges, opportunities, 
and needs of the 21st century and for implementation of the 2030 Agenda.  It also contributes 
to the Secretary-General’s vision of future global cooperation, as set out in his “Our Common 
Agenda” report. 
As the Human Rights Council opens a fourth cycle of the Universal Periodic Review this year, 
we must take this as an opportunity to reflect on the developments during the previous reviews, 
and to renew efforts towards enhanced implementation of recommendations already accepted.
We call on all Member States to actively and meaningfully participate in this process and to 
give the impetus for positive change among their peers. Through this distinctive state-driven 
mechanism, all Member States have the potential to help build a free and enabling environment 
where citizens and media workers alike can thrive. 
 
H.E. Mr. Abdulla Shahid  
President of the United Nations General Assembly 
H.E. Mr. Santiago Irazabal Mourão  
President of the General Conference of UNESCO
H.E. Mr. Federico Villegas  
President of the Human Rights Council
2Guidance note for Member States
Overview
 
The document provides text and motivation for model recommendations, addressing the 
nine following topics concerning to freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to 
information:
| Freedom of expression:
i. Reviewing overly-broad legal terminology;
ii. Decriminalizing defamation;
| Safety of journalists:
iii. Monitoring, investigating and reporting  on attacks and judicial follow up;
iv. Setting up or strengthening institutional mechanisms;
v. Protecting women  journalists;
vi. Taking advantage of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists 
and the Issue of Impunity;
| Access to information (ATI):
vii. Adoption of ATI laws/policies and implementation;
viii. Obligations of UN Member States to monitor  and report on ATI;
ix. Commitments to ensure inclusivity, including right to information, for persons with 
disabilities, indigenous people and other marginalized groups.
3THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR):  
model recommendations in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information 
The suggested text in each case is:
 | FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION:  
i. Country XX is urged to revise existing legislation, in particular undefined and overly 
broad terminology, which may restrict the exercise of freedom of expression in ways 
that are incompatible with international human rights law”.
ii. “Country XX is encouraged to decriminalize defamation and place it within civil 
defamation legislation that is in accordance with international standards”. 
or:
 “Country XX is encouraged to revise civil defamation laws, where needed, and bring 
them in line with international standards”.
 | SAFETY OF JOURNALISTS:  
iii. “Country XX is urged to continue investigating the cases of killed journalists and 
to voluntarily report on the status of judicial follow-up to UNESCO and to the SDG 
16.10.1 monitoring processes”.
iv. “Country XX is urged to establish mechanisms for the monitoring, prevention, 
protection and investigation of acts of intimidation, violence and reprisals that target 
journalists, in consultation with relevant stakeholders”. 
or:
 “Country XX is urged to strengthen, including through financial means, the operations 
of the existing mechanisms for the protection of journalists, in consultation with 
relevant stakeholders”.
v. “Country XX is urged to ensure thorough investigation and prosecution of online 
violence, especially attacks directed against women journalists”.
vi. “Country XX is encouraged to consider taking advantage of the United Nations 
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity as a means 
of strengthening the protection of journalists and the relevant domestic legal 
framework”.
 | ACCESS TO INFORMATION (ATI):  
vii. “Country XX is encouraged to introduce, or amend, an access to information law 
that is in accordance with international standards, in particular establishing an 
independent oversight institution with the capacity to implement the access to 
information law”.
viii. “Country XX is encouraged to co-operate with UNESCO’s annual survey instrument 
to measure global progress on access to information, and to consider including 
relevant information in their Voluntary National Reviews under the SDGs”.
ix. “Country XX is encouraged to introduce, or amend, an access to information law 
that is in accordance with international standards and ensures the inclusion of legal 
provisions to assist persons with disabilities, indigenous people and other marginalized 
groups, thus enabling these groups with meaningful access to information”.
4Guidance note for Member States
Background
 
As established by the United Nations Human Rights Council1 , the basis of the UPR process is 
a) the Charter of the United Nations; b) the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; c) Human 
rights instruments to which a State is party, d) Voluntary pledges and commitments made 
by States, including those undertaken when presenting their candidatures for election to the 
Human Rights Council and e) Applicable provisions of international humanitarian law. In the 
case of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information, Article 19 of both 
the UDHR and the ICCPR upholds the right to seek, receive and impart information, which is 
not only the foundation for press freedom, but which also underpins the importance of safety 
of journalists and each citizen’s right to receive information.
In 2015, 193 Member States of the United Nations committed themselves to the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. Member States have clearly expressed their resolve to back 
the implementation of the SDGs with robust, voluntary, effective, participatory, transparent, 
integrated reviews of progress, starting at the national level, which underpins a framework that 
also encompasses global and regional reviews. The key to this process on the Member State 
level is the Voluntary National Review (VNR) through which countries assess and present 
progress made in achieving the global goals and the pledge to leave no one behind. The purpose 
of VNRs is to present a snapshot of where the country stands in SDG implementation, with a 
view to help accelerate progress through experience sharing, peer-learning, identifying gaps 
and good practices, and mobilizing partnerships.
There is a strong correlation between the human rights issues 
that emerge in a UPR exercise and the ongoing work of Member 
States to progress towards the achievement of the agreed SDGs. 
Reporting within the VNR and implementation of the UPR 
recommendations reinforce each other. In this context, SDG 
16.10, provides a vision to “Ensure public access to information 
and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national 
legislation and international agreements2”. In linking the issues 
of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to 
information, the SDGs provide a direct connection to the work 
of the Human Rights Council, and particularly to the relevance of 
the SDG monitoring to the UPR process, and vice versa.
In terms of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information, metadata 
for SDG 16.10.1 and SDG 16.10.2 are particularly relevant. The metadata for SDG 16.10.1 
is “Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, enforced disappearance, arbitrary 
detention and torture of journalists, associated media personnel, trade unionists and 
human rights advocates in the previous 12 months” .
The inclusion of this indicator within the SDG framework is inter alia  an acknowledgement 
of the importance of the global monitoring of violence against journalists. It brings forward 
an ambitious agenda which requires an integral monitoring system, capable of capturing the 
scope and nature of lethal and nonlethal attacks which are regularly made to silence journalists, 
and which incorporates the input of civil society and academia and develops local monitoring 
capacities. In this vein, the indicator establishes that data will be collected from global, regional 
and national mandated bodies, mechanisms and institutions that generate and maintain 
administrative data, including UNESCO´s Observatory of Killed Journalists condemned by 
the UNESCO Director-General , and mandated reports (pg. 5 indicator´s metadata).
1  A/HRC/RES/5/1
2  https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/
5THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR):  
model recommendations in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information 
6Further, UNESCO data, which draws upon Member State voluntary submissions, feeds the 
UNESCO Director General´s reports to the intergovernmental council of the International 
Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC), in response to their mandate. 
This system is a unique mechanism within the UN that monitors the killings of journalists and 
the issue of impunity.
SDG 16.10.2 “number of countries that adopt and implement constitutional, statutory 
and/or policy guarantees for public access to information” , assesses: (a) whether a country 
has constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information; (b) 
the extent to which such national guarantees reflect international agreements; and (c) the 
implementation mechanisms in place for such guarantees, including the following variables:
 ☐Government efforts to publicly promote the right to information;
 ☐Citizens’ awareness of their legal right to information and their ability to utilize 
it effectively;
 ☐The capacity of public bodies to provide information upon request by the 
public3;
 ☐The existence of an effective oversight and appeals mechanism as well as a 
narrowly-defined regime of legitimate exceptions to access to information 
requests.
 
As an additional synergy to the SDG monitoring and the UPR processes, Member States may 
also wish to use World Press Freedom Day (3 May), and the International Day to End Impunity 
for Crimes against Journalists (2 November), both proclaimed by the UN General Assembly, to 
further sensitize about the rights that are foundational to these recognized commemorations. 
States may also use the International Day for the Universal Access to Information, approved 
by both UNESCO and the UNGA to signal progress in regard to implementation of UPR 
recommendations.
UNESCO, as the UN Agency with a specific mandate to promote free flow of information and to 
coordinate the UN Plan of Action on Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity , stands ready 
with its worldwide network to support implementation of accepted UPR recommendations 
through sharing of good practices, technical expertise, monitoring and capacity building.
In depth guidance on how to provide UPR recommendations on FOE and ATI can be 
found in the following UNESCO guides: 
 ☐Guidelines for United Nations Country Teams on the Universal Periodic Review 
and its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and 
safety of journalists. 
 ☐Guidelines for Information Commissioners on the Universal Periodic Review 
and its potential to foster access to information. 
 ☐Guidelines for National Human Rights Institutions to promote freedom of 
expression through the Universal Periodic Review.
 ☐Guidelines for civil society organizations on the Universal Periodic Review and 
its potential to foster freedom of expression, access to information and safety of 
journalists.
3  https://sdg.data.gov/16-10-2/7 | FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION: 
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#1:“Country XX is urged to revise existing legislation, in particular 
undefined and overly-broad terminology, which may restrict the 
exercise of freedom of expression in ways that are incompatible 
with international human rights law”. 
WHENWhen existing legislation fails to meet the level of clarity and 
predictability as required by international human rights law, and/or has 
been used to establish undue restrictions to freedom of expression and 
to journalists in the legitimate exercise of their work.
MOTIVATION: 
 →Article 19(3) demands a level of clarity and precision for restrictions 
to freedom of expression. Restrictions must thus be sufficiently clear, 
accessible and predictable by recipients. 
 →Overbroad or vague legislation can be used to repress legitimate 
expression. This is often the case with defamation and libel laws, laws 
on misinformation and disinformation or counter-terrorism and 
counter-extremism legislation4.
 
4  HRC Resolutions 39/6 (2018) and 45/18 (2020)Model  
RecommendationsGuidance note for Member StatesTHE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR):  
model recommendations in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information 
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#2:“Country XX is encouraged to decriminalize defamation and place 
it within civil defamation legislation that is in accordance with 
international standards”.
Or alternatively, when concerns have been raised about the misuse 
existing legislation to silence dissent or the legitimate exercise of 
freedom of expression:
“Country XX is encouraged to revise civil defamation laws, where 
needed, and bring them in line with international standards”.
WHEN When defamation is considered a criminal offense by the domestic 
legal framework, establishing fines or imprisonment, or when there 
is evidence of an extended misuse of civil lawsuits, also known as 
Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation (SLAPPS) which aim to 
discourage journalists or media groups from exercising their work and 
which have disproportionate penalties.
MOTIVATION:  →Care should be taken by States parties to avoid disproportionately 
punitive measures and penalties. States parties should consider 
repealing the decriminalization of defamation and, in any case, the 
application of the criminal law should only be countenanced in the 
most serious of cases, and imprisonment is never an appropriate 
penalty5 for defamation.
 
 
 | SAFETY OF JOURNALISTS: 
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#3:“Country XX is urged to continue investigating the cases of killed 
journalists and to voluntarily report on the status of judicial follow-
up to UNESCO and to the SDG 16.10.1 monitoring processes”.
WHEN
In cases of killings, where the Member State has not provided a response 
to the UNESCO Director-General’s request on the status of the inquiry 
or in cases where the Member State has not covered safety of journalists 
in the SDG monitoring and reporting.
MOTIVATION: 
 →To assess the need for UPR recommendations, and for reporting on 
progress, evidence is needed.
5  See: General Comment No 34. of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) – CCPR (2011) and Amicus Curiae People of the 
Philippines vs. Reynaldo Santos and Maria Angelita Ressa, and Rappler, Inc. https://freedex.org/wp-content/blogs.dir/2015/files/2020/06/KayeAmicus-
09June20-converted.pdf8Guidance note for Member States
 →In this regard, the UNESCO Observatory contains information on 
killed journalists, with search options based on nationality, country of 
killing, name, sex, media type, and employment status. The database 
also provides information about the status of judicial enquiries. As 
a result, country profiles allow insights into levels of impunity per 
country. Information on countries´ responses to SDG 16.10.1 can 
be found in UNESCO´s report on World Trends in Freedom of 
Expression and Media Development.
 →The aforementioned recommendation enables a better understanding 
of the gaps that need to be addressed by countries in their efforts 
towards achieving a reduction in the number of killings of journalists 
and in addressing impunity. It also provides insights into whether 
the Member State can be further encouraged to promote National 
Protection Mechanisms for journalists and media workers more 
broadly.
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#4:“Country XX is urged to establish mechanisms for the monitoring, 
prevention, protection and investigation of acts of intimidation, 
violence and reprisals that target journalists, in consultation with 
relevant stakeholders”.
or, alternatively, in circumstances where there is a protection 
mechanism in place, but concerns have been raised about its 
functioning:
“Country XX is urged to strengthen, including through financial 
means, the operations of the existing mechanisms for the protection 
of journalists, in consultation with relevant stakeholders”.
WHEN
When evidence shows there is a high rate of impunity for crimes against 
journalists and a need to ensure their protection.
MOTIVATION:  →The development and implementation of nationally owned protection 
mechanisms on attacks against journalists and combating impunity 
ensures a concrete focus on these issues from local legal duty-bearers. 
 →Making sure that relevant stakeholders are effectively integrated 
into a safety mechanism can dramatically increase its chances 
of succeeding by harnessing the skills, resources, and support of 
different stakeholders, and by promoting coordination, as opposed to 
duplication or even competition6. 
 →Developing an institutionalized mechanism is usually a precondition 
for sustainable monitoring, reporting and action to protect journalists 
and ensure prosecution. The circumstances from which existing 
mechanisms are borne are often rooted in particular historical and 
social contexts. When implementing this recommendation, it could be 
advisable to seek support from organizations focusing on the issue of 
safety of journalists such as UNESCO.
6  UNESCO and Center for Law and Democracy - Supporting Freedom of Expression: A Practical Guide to Developing Specialised Safety Mechanisms 
Consultation Paper (2016) https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/supporting-freedom-of-expression_guide-safety-mechanisms.pdf
9THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR):  
model recommendations in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information 
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#5:“Country XX is urged to ensure thorough investigation and 
prosecution of online violence, especially attacks directed against 
women journalists”.
WHEN
When evidence shows there are gaps in monitoring, protection and 
prosecuting which are responsible for a high rate of impunity for crimes 
against women journalists overall, especially in digital spaces.
MOTIVATION:  →According to a recent survey by UNESCO and International Center 
for Journalists (ICFJ), four out of every five respondents who identify 
as women said they had experienced online violence, including sexual 
violence, and more than one in ten had also received threats against 
those close to them. Further, only 11% of the women journalists 
surveyed had reported instances of online violence to the police, and 
only 8% had taken legal action7.
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#6:“Country XX is encouraged to consider taking advantage of the 
United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the 
Issue of Impunity as a means of strengthening the protection of 
journalists and the relevant domestic legal framework”.
WHEN
When different reports show structural problems for the safety of 
journalists.
MOTIVATION:  →The UN Plan promotes the safety of journalists through a wide range 
of actions including standard-setting, policy-making, monitoring, 
reporting, capacity building and awareness-raising on all levels. 
Cooperation with Member States is key to developing legislation 
and other institutional mechanisms to guarantee a safe media 
environment. 
 →The Plan follows a multi-stakeholder approach to address threats 
against journalists. It aims to develop shared solutions and draws 
the wider UN system into a coordinated programme to stop the 
killing of journalists along with threats made against them. It does 
so through the cooperation of a variety of stakeholders, including 
Member States. 
 →Specific advice to Member States can be found in the Consultation 
Outcome Document by OHCHR and UNESCO (2017)8.
7 UNESCO Threats that silence: Threats in the Safety of Journalists (2021) https://unesdoc.unesco.org/in/documentViewer.
xhtml?v=2.1.196&id=p::usmarcdef_0000379589&file=/in/rest/annotationSVC/DownloadWatermarkedAttachment/attach_import_60bee60a-ae1c-43cb-
9f69-94acf2c347e8%3F_%3D379589eng.pdf&locale=en&multi=true&ark=/ark:/48223/pf0000379589/PDF/379589eng.pdf#WTR_SafetyChapter_Oct29pm.
indd%3A.16970%3A213
8 Strengthening the Implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/
Documents/Issues/Journalists/OutcomeDocument.pdf
10Guidance note for Member States
 | ACCESS TO INFORMATION (ATI): 
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#7:“Country XX is encouraged to introduce, or amend, an ATI that is in 
accordance with international standards, in particular establishing 
an independent oversight institution with the capacity to implement 
the access to information law”.
WHENWhen evidence shows there is not an ATI law9 and/or there is no 
specialized oversight body10. This information can be found at 
UNESCO’s monitoring website11 from with information supplied 
by Member States themselves. Further information, although not 
supplied by Member States, may be gathered from the Global Right to 
Information Rating Map.12
MOTIVATION:  →Data supplied by UN Member States to UNESCO, is collected 
under the survey mandated by UNESCO´s specialized body, the 
International Programme for Development of Communication 
(IPDC). These enable a better understanding of the gaps and 
challenges that need to be addressed by countries that are relevant to 
the full enjoyment of the right to information.
 →Among countries with ATI legal guarantees, the 2021 Survey noted a 
positive trend towards acknowledging the importance of a dedicated 
institutional arrangement  within public bodies to deal with 
access to information, which in itself sets the foundation for both 
proactive and reactive disclosure. Another finding is that countries 
with independent specialized oversight institutions for access to 
information are likely to perform better than those without.
 →An ATI specialized oversight institution ideally should be established 
by the law, which should provide for an individual right of appeal to 
an administrative body. This could be located in an existing body 
such as an Ombudsman or Human Rights Commission, or a body set 
up specifically for the purpose (eg. Information Commission).
 →In either case, the body’s independence should be guaranteed, 
both formally and through the legal process by which the executive 
staff are appointed. To ensure independence, it is important that 
representative bodies such as an all-party parliamentary committee 
can make such appointments. Individuals appointed to such a body 
should be required to meet strict standards of professionalism, 
independence and competence.
9 Question in UNESCO survey: Whether a constitutional, statutory and/or other legal guarantee that recognizes Access to Information as a fundamental right 
exists in your country.
10  Question in UNESCO survey: Whether the legal guarantee on Access to Information specifies the need of a dedicated oversight institution [or institutions].
11 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2) https://www.unesco.org/reports/access-to-information/2021/en
12 Centre for Law and Democracy: https://www.rti-rating.org/
11THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR):  
model recommendations in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information 
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#8:“Country XX is encouraged to co-operate with UNESCO’s annual 
survey instrument to measure global progress on ATI, and to 
consider including relevant information in their Voluntary National 
Reviews under the SDGs”.
WHEN
This recommendation is relevant when evidence shows that the country 
is not in the list of those responding to the UNESCO global survey13 or 
do not include information on SDG 16.10.2 in their VNRs.
MOTIVATION:  →UNESCO, as the UN custodian agency for Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) Indicator 16.10.2, has been mandated by its Member 
States to monitor and report progress on this indicator worldwide. 
Within this context, UNESCO conducts annually the Survey on 
Public Access to Information (SDG Indicator 16.10.2). The objective 
of the survey is to collect global data on the adoption of legal 
guarantees on Access to Information, as well as the main tendencies 
in the implementation of these guarantees. In 2021, 102 countries 
participated in the survey. UNESCO reports the information to 
the UN Secretary-General´s global SDG report and to UNESCO´s 
IPDC.
 →Participation in the survey and monitoring of ATI situations is not an 
end in itself. It serves as a means for countries themselves to identify 
their own weak spots - and thus it provides an incentive for them to 
improve their legal frameworks, implementation, and enforcement. 
The responses may also be useful for many other purposes, 
including SDG reports and reporting on the implementation of UPR 
recommendations.
 →Participation in both mechanisms – the UNESCO survey and the 
VNR - encourages Member States to implement this recommendation 
of value to both the right to access to information as per interests of 
the UPR and the VNR monitoring. These mechanisms are thus all 
mutually complementary, and recommendations can help reinforce 
the synergies.
13  https://www.unesco.org/reports/access-to-information/2021/en
12Guidance note for Member States
MODEL RECOMMENDATION  
#9:“Country XX is encouraged to introduce, or amend, an ATI law 
that is in accordance with international standards, which ensures 
inclusion legal provisions to assist persons with disabilities, 
indigenous people and other marginalized groups, thus enabling 
these groups with meaningful access to information”.
WHENThis recommendation is relevant to the rights of persons with disabilities 
are absent from most Access to Information laws or policies. Data about 
this issue is available in UNESCO´s briefing on how to assess ATI laws 
are sufficiently inclusive of disability rights.14
MOTIVATION:  →For the countries where access to information legislation exists but 
lacks a special arrangement to address the needs of excluded groups, 
it is recommended to make a link between access to information and 
other standard-setting documents. As an example, the UN Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities contains a specific article 
21 on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information.
 →UNESCO´s analysis of ATI-related recommendations made by 
the Member States during all three UPR cycles suggests that this 
recommendation, not just the right to information but also rights 
related to inclusivity, gender equality (and other areas of equality), 
and access to public services strengthen this and other rights as well.
 →UNESCO´s analysis of the UPR data shows that many Member States 
have an interest in strengthening links between access to information 
and empowerment of women and children’s rights, health, education, 
rights of persons with disabilities, and the right to privacy15.
 →By providing specific legal guarantees of the right to information 
for marginalized groups and tools for ATI laws to function, this 
UPR recommendation can help empower marginalized groups and 
contribute to their right to inclusion and development.
 
Useful resources 
 ☐UNESCO - Media development indicators: a framework for assessing media 
development - https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000163102 
 ☐UNESCO Journalists’ Safety Indicators - https://en.unesco.org/themes/safety-of-
journalists/journalists-safety-indicators 
 ☐UNESCO - Director-General Report on the Safety of Journalists and the Danger 
of Impunity 2020 https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374700 
 ☐UNESCO Basic Texts related to the Safety of Journalists - https://en.unesco.org/
themes/safety-journalists/basic-texts
 ☐UN Plan of Action - UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue 
of Impunity - https://en.unesco.org/un-plan-action-safety-journalists
14 Access to Information laws: a guarantee of inclusion and disability rights: Issue brief, https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380470
15 Access to information: a new promise for sustainable development, https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371485.locale=en
13THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW (UPR):  
model recommendations in the field of freedom of expression, safety of journalists and access to information 14Annex
 
Joint statement on the Safety of Journalists on the occasion of the World 
Press Freedom Day 2022
Punta del Este, Uruguay - 3 May 2022 – Today, on the occasion of World Press Freedom Day, 
we wish to recall the paramount importance of ensuring journalists and media workers can 
work freely, independently and safely, without hindrances, threats, or violent reprisals. Each 
and every day, we are reminded of how vital the information they provide is for democracy, the 
promotion and protection of human rights, fighting corruption, sustainable development and 
preserving international peace and security. 
Multiple resolutions, declarations, and commitments on the safety of journalists have been 
adopted by our respective bodies, including the 2021 UN General Assembly resolution on the 
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity (A/RES/76/173), the 2020 Human Rights Council 
resolution on the safety of journalists (A/HRC/RES/45/18), and the 2021 Windhoek+30 
Declaration on information as a public good (UNESCO General Conference Resolution 
41C.41). In addition, the wider UN system developed a multistakeholder coordination 
framework known as the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of 
Impunity, adopted by the UN principals in 2012. 
As we mark the 10th anniversary of the UN Plan of Action this year, we welcome the 
considerable progress made over the past decade in the implementation of the Plan. We 
applaud those governments which have made the safety of journalists a priority, within their 
borders and beyond, and highlight the significant contribution of civil society organizations 
that are committed to advancing media freedom and safety. Still, too many challenges prevail, 
including high levels of impunity for crimes against journalists, a rise in the number of 
journalists detained and an increased legal harassment against them, online violence, the use 
of surveillance tools to hinder the journalist’s work, increased attacks on women journalists, 
and the rise of killings in non-conflict environments. 
As we embark on the last decade to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 
Agenda, it is important to remember the contribution of freedom of expression, press freedom 
and access to information to all other rights, such as quality education, the eradication of 
poverty, and access to justice and healthcare. 
This is why, as we look forward to 10 more years of progress in defending the safety of 
journalists, freedom of expression, and access to information for all, we call on Member States, 
the UN system, regional bodies, civil society, the judiciary and all concerned actors to join 
forces in furthering the objectives of the UN Plan of Action. By working together to strengthen 
its implementation and to reach SDG Target 16.10, we can continue to build a safer and more 
enabling environment for journalists and media workers, and protect the right of every citizen 
to reliable, and, often, lifesaving information. 
H.E. Mr. Abdulla Shahid  
President of the United Nations General Assembly 
H.E. Mr. Santiago Irazabal Mourão  
President of the General Conference of UNESCO 
H.E. Mr. Federico Villegas  
President of the Human Rights CouncilGuidance note for Member States15
Published in 2022 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France ©UNESCO. This document is available in 
Open Access under the Attribution ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) License. By 
using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of 
the UNESCO Open Access Repository. The designations employed and the presentation of 
material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or 
of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The ideas  
and  opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily 
those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.of UNESCO and do not commit the 
Organization. 
