Saudi ArabiaSyriaIraqLebanon
Israel
Egypt
Jordan
THE BOUNDARIES AND NAMES SHOWN AND THE DESIGNATIONS USED ON THIS MAP DO NOT IMPLY OFFICIAL ENDORSEMENT OR ACCEPTANCE BY THE UNITED NATIONS
Context        
The space and role granted to civil society organizations in Jordan has diminished in recent years, and 
media have been facing increasing restrictions. A recent amendment to Article 255 of the Jordanian Penal 
Code further toughened penalties for journalists that publish news on criminal investigations and secret 
trials before their official announcement, and Article 11 of the Cybercrime Law allows Jordanian authorities 
to detain individuals and journalists suspected of violating libel and slander laws. According to a report by 
local organization Centre for Defending Freedom of Journalists , this law has been used against political 
activists, journalists and citizens expressing their political views on their personal social media accounts. 
While Jordan was the first Arab country to adopt a law giving individuals a right to access information 
held by public bodies, its implementation has been fragmented in the 15 years since its adoption. The 
Multi-Donor Programme has therefore supported since 2021 advocacy efforts towards a reform of the 
law to align it with international standards. Actions in 2022 also included awareness-raising around the 
CI-2023/FEJ/MDP/CS/13UNESCO’s Multi-donor Programme on 
Freedom of Expression and Safety of 
Journalists (MDP) action inJORDAN OUTCOME 1 & 2International Days and on the safety of women journalists, as well as coordinating the participation of 
Jordanian stakeholders in various regional initiatives for the Arab States. Two major activities planned for 
2022, namely capacity-building for judicial operators and support to digital media on gender-sensitive and 
investigative reporting, were however delayed to 2023 due to various challenges. 
With regards to Media and Information Literacy (MIL), UNESCO, in cooperation with national and 
international partners, is working to strengthen local stakeholders’ capacities so as to bring MIL concepts 
to Jordan with a higher level of quality through programmes and projects focusing on policy strategy, 
articulation and implementation. Jordan has taken a proactive approach to MIL, as the country adopted 
a National Action Plan for MIL in 2021, whose implementation is under the purview of the Ministry of 
Culture. 
Areas of action and progress 
OUTCOME 1
OUTPUT 1: AWARENESS-RAISING AND ADVOCACY
• A national celebration of World Press Freedom Day  was held in Jordan. It brought together close 
to 100 politicians; journalists; media representatives; cybersecurity managers; legal experts; and 
journalism students to explore digital safety issues and develop concrete recommendations to address 
threats posed to media freedom and privacy by increased cybersecurity and surveillance. Discussions 
facilitated the sharing of best practices to ensure the digital safety of journalists, and encouraged 
actions to provide legal support for journalists who are victims of online violations. In particular, the 
media industry and professional associations were encouraged to establish safety provisions for 
women journalists, including but not limited to physical and digital safety training courses. A national 
communication campaign was also created to highlight specific digital threats faced by journalists in 
Jordan.
• World Press Freedom Day  was also marked by a series of three film screenings held in partnership with 
the Royal Film Commission. The events featured films that highlight the work of journalists and were 
attended by close to 250 people.  The screenings were followed by panel discussions with Jordanian 
writers, documentary film producers and human rights defenders. Among the selected films were 
“Writing with Fire”, which follows a group of Dalit women in Uttar Pradesh, India, in their transition 
to digital journalism after 14 years of producing a newspaper; “Checks and Balances”, which focuses 
on one of Algeria’s most famous newspapers, El Watan, after the country’s “black decade”; and “The 
Social Dilemma”, on social networks’ impact on individuals’ lives. “Freedom of expression, independent journalism and press freedom are key components for economic, 
social, and democratic development. The free flow of ideas and opinions, as well as debate and critical 
examination, create a wealth of ideas and drive innovation in any society. Sweden will continue to 
support human rights, freedom of speech and of the press in Jordan and the region”.
H.E. Alexandra Rydmark , Sweden’s Ambassador to Jordan, during the national celebration of World 
Press Freedom Day
JORDAN OUTCOME 1 & 2• The International Day for Universal Access to Information  was marked by a roundtable discussion 
organized in partnership with the Coalition of Jordanian Human Rights Civil Society Organizations 
(HIMAM), which focused on key areas of concerns with respect to access to information. The event was 
attended by 30 representatives of civil society organizations, media, government bodies, regulators, 
and coordinators of the right to information. Participants discussed the need to revise Jordan’s access 
to information law to align it with international standards and the need for Jordanian public bodies 
to enhance its implementation. A white paper summarizing discussions and recommendations for 
legislative and procedural reform was then produced, covering three main themes: 1) content of the 
law and what revisions are necessary to facilitate access to information; 2) positive engagement 
of government and public bodies to guarantee the right to access information; and 3) CSOs’ role in 
pushing for best practices in law and practice. 
• In commemoration of the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists  and 
the 10th anniversary of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity , 
UNESCO’s Amman Office supported the participation of two Jordanian speakers in a regional event 
held in Tunis, Tunisia.
• In line with UNESCO’s wider efforts to raise awareness on and enhance the safety of women journalists, 
UNESCO’s Amman Office supported the Arab Women in Media Conference , which took place in 
Madaba, Jordan. One of the conference’s areas of focus was the digital safety of women journalists, 
with discussions underlining how online and offline attacks on women journalists are hurting societies 
as a whole. Key conclusions and recommendations arising from the conference’s discussions included: 
training authorities and police on freedom of expression; undertaking comprehensive research on 
online harassment; developing comprehensive policies to monitor cases of online abuse and respond 
to them; and capacity-building to empower women journalists and sensitize media managers. The 
conference was attended by HRH Princess Basma Bint Talal, a delegation of ministers, and around 250 
media professionals from the Arab States region. “Attending the event enlightened my views on the importance of journalism, and the “Checks and 
Balances” documentary perfectly embodied the political situation and strain on journalists. The 
discussion after the screening, which was open to all audience members, opened my eyes to the 
challenges of journalism in the Arab region and I enjoyed hearing other peoples’ views and opinions on 
the ideas in the film”. 
Khaira , a student, after attending the World Press Freedom Day film screenings
“Access to information is crucial to effectively respect human rights. In the absence of respect for the 
right to freedom of information or access to information, human rights abuses take place in secret, 
impunity flourishes, and there is no way to expose inefficient government”.  
Rana Husseini , journalist and human rights activistJORDAN OUTCOME 1 & 2OUTPUT 4: POLICY ADVICE AND REINFORCEMENT OF DUTY BEARERS’ CAPACITIES 
• UNESCO’s Amman Office facilitated the participation of two Jordanian judges in the regional training 
“Bringing together the Judges: The Role of the Justice System in Enhancing the Freedom of Expression in 
the Arab Region ”, which was held in Morocco. Building on this, planning has advanced for a national 
training for Jordanian judicial operators that will begin in February 2023. 
OUTCOME 2
OUTPUT 4: MEDIA AND INFORMATION LITERACY
• In 2022, efforts were directed toward policy and strategy development and implementation. UNESCO 
has been supporting the government in advancing, promoting, and implementing its National Plan 
through technical assistance and capacity-building on MIL for multiple stakeholders. 
• In partnership with the Jordan Media Institute (JMI), UNESCO has been actively involved in providing 
MIL for young people and the broader community, with the aim of strengthening their critical 
thinking skills in support of their civic and social participation, self-expression, as well as to counter 
disinformation. UNESCO and JMI’s efforts in this regard began through a joint initiative in 2016, and 
have continued through the years, most recently in celebration of the Global Media and Information 
Literacy Week in October 2022. 
• A one-day Youth Forum for 65 youth leaders representing 28 organizations was organized during 
Global MIL Week in October 2022. Short workshops and discussions within the youth networks 
were facilitated to equip them with competencies and skills to translate MIL concepts into solutions 
appropriate for their institutions and beneficiaries.
• 200 young people were reached out through interactive media and information literacy awareness-
raising sessions.
• 65 youth leaders representing 28 organizations were provided with guidance on integrating media and 
information literacy in their organizations’ policies and programmes.“Arab women have shown a remarkable and prominent presence in the field of media in all forms. 
Female reporters play a role that is no less important than their male counterparts and is just as risky, as 
women also provide coverage of wars and conflict areas”. 
HRH Princess Basma Bint Talala , during the conference 
Key achievements
 Æ Media interest in World Press Freedom Day commemorations has increased the visibility of the film 
screenings, resulting in requests and opportunities to scale up this initiative in 2023. 
 Æ The Arab Women in Media Conference guaranteed a wide regional reach for UNESCO, who regained 
visibility and its strategic position in the field of promoting free, independent, pluralistic and gender-
inclusive media in Jordan. Recommendations were gathered during the event and will be used by 
UNESCO’s Amman Office to expand its work on the safety of women journalists in the country.
JORDAN OUTCOME 1 & 2 Æ The white paper on access to information reform produced based on discussions held on IDUAI 
was used as a basis for discussions with parliamentarians and government bodies, with the aim 
of reinvigorating advocacy and of involving more stakeholders in the reform process. As a result, 
representatives of oversight bodies such as the Information Commissioner, the Minister of Culture, 
and the Legislation and Opinion Bureau Director sent a letter calling on parliament to make the reform 
a priority in their agenda.
 Æ Jordan has taken steps to develop further and implement MIL policies and capacity-building strategies. 
The government has notably included MIL in its roadmap for the country’s future.“With more equitable access to information, a greater number of women would be aware of and able to 
protect their other fundamental rights – to live free from violence, to make informed health decisions, 
and to advocate for the protection of their labour rights. Nonetheless, reality remains a stark reminder 
of the gap between aspiration and practice, as the right of access to information remains elusive for 
most women”. 
Zainab Al Bdoul , Member of Parliament, speaking at the roundtable on access to information 
Challenges, risks and remedial actions
Although the Government of Jordan adopted a National Strategy for media and information literacy, the 
implementation of the action plan is currently hampered by a lack of funding as there is no budgetary 
commitment so far. Jordan has been given the mandate to host the 2023 Global Media and Information 
Literacy Week. This will be an opportunity to mobilize funds and increase stakeholders’ advocacy for the 
inclusion of MIL in all aspects of society, including in formal and non-formal education. 
 
In addition, no nationwide study has been undertaken to assess the level of media and information literacy 
among Jordanians and the status of media and information literacy in the country. An assessment study 
is supported through the MDP and will be available in 2023 and will take in-depth insight into the existing 
MIL practices, policies, strategies, documents and activities of key stakeholders across Jordan. Main gaps 
and needs at national level will be identified and concrete examples of good practices analyzed. The key 
indicators suggested in the following UNESCO publications will be instructive to the assessment process: 
1) Media and Information Literacy: Policy and Strategy Guidelines, 2) Media and Information Literate 
Citizens: Think Critically, Click Wisely! 3) Global Media and Information Literacy Assessment Framework: 
Country Readiness and Competencies.
 
The assessment will lead to an analysis of how relevant and up to date the existing media and information 
literacy strategy is, to what extent the strategy reflects international standards and good practices, and 
how it can be updated. Research findings will allow key stakeholders in Jordan to learn, transfer or multiply 
good models, policies or practices of MIL in the country.
Some challenges were encountered in terms of political resolve, as making the rights to freedom of 
expression and access to information real national priorities and maintaining the interest of partners was 
difficult. As a response, UNESCO’s Amman Office used different opportunities to try to mobilize strong 
political will and resource mobilization by proposing a wide range of possible types of actions. 
Frequent turnover and reshuffles within judicial training institutions adversely impacted the continuity 
of work with judges and its sustainability, as systems are often based on individuals rather than being 
institutionalized. This way, rather than having an organizational strategy for working on freedom of JORDAN OUTCOME 1 & 2Forthcoming actions
Throughout 2023 and beyond, UNESCO will continue to support the enhanced capacities of educators, 
information and media professionals, youth organizations, and disadvantaged populations in the area 
of media and information literacy, assisting the country in implementing the national MIL policies and 
strategies. Jordan has agreed to be the host country for Global Media and Information Literacy Week 
Feature Conference and Youth Forum Agenda in October 2023. 
In the next two years, Jordan will be supported to expand its activities on national parliamentary elections, 
which are set to take place in the autumn of 2024. This will be done through two main axes: capacity-
building of the media to provide fair and balanced coverage and reporting on electoral activities and media 
& information literacy (MIL) for citizens, youth-led organizations, and fact-checking platforms. Future 
actions aim at equipping the younger generations with the requisite competencies and practical skills 
needed to debunk disinformation and counter hate speech online prior to and during the election process.
 
UNESCO future support should lead to an analysis of the status of people’s media and information literacy 
competencies in Jordan, the readiness of teachers to teach media and information literacy, how relevant 
and up to date is the existing national MIL strategy, to what extent does the strategy reflect international 
standards and good practices, how it can be updated, and how to include new actors such as private sector.
Based on recommendations gathered on Jordan’s legislative framework of access to information, 
UNESCO’s Amman Office will continue its advocacy efforts to encourage a reform of the country’s Access 
to Information Law, and to encourage additional efforts at the level of secondary legislation. 
Capacity-building activities for judges, which were originally planned for 2022, will be held in 2023. They 
will pay particular attention to identifying and exchanging best practices and jurisprudence aligned with 
international standards and related to digital challenges (such as intermediary liability, hate speech, 
disinformation, and data privacy). 
UNESCO will also work with digital media on strengthening reporting and storytelling, by providing training 
on gender-sensitive reporting, climate change, investigative reporting, and fact-checking.  This will be part 
of wider efforts to build back a stronger media system after the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, in 
synergy with the IPDC. 
Particular attention will also be given to the safety of women journalists in 2023 based on recommendations 
gathered during the Arab Women in Media conference, including capacity-building for women journalists 
and media managers on online and offline safety-related issues. This will be coupled with activities 
targeting authorities to encourage them to provide swift and adequate assistance to women journalists 
who experience online harassment.expression issues, this depends on approaches taken by duty-bearers leading the judicial institute at 
that time. Plans for capacity-building of judicial operators therefore had to be rearranged several times 
and subsequently postponed to 2023. To encourage judicial training institutes to integrate modules on 
freedom of expression, the safety of journalists and access to information into their permanent curricula 
and training programmes, a Memorandum of Understanding is being developed with the Judicial Council 
of Jordan.
Another challenge has been uneven and overall limited participation by other UN entities in activities 
on freedom of expression. This is due to freedom of expression, the safety of journalists and access to 
information not being part of the mandate of several agencies, and not being a primary aspect of the work 
of many others. UNESCO’s Amman Office therefore faced limitations in terms of resources and scattered 
actions at the national level. As a response, the aforementioned rights have been increasingly incorporated 
by the Office into the National 2023-2027 Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 
which also includes further inter-agency cooperation between UNESCO, UNDP, UN Women and UNFPA.
JORDAN OUTCOME 1 & 2