Algeria
Morocco
THE BOUNDARIES AND NAMES SHOWN AND THE DESIGNATIONS USED ON THIS MAP DO NOT IMPLY OFFICIAL ENDORSEMENT OR ACCEPTANCE BY THE UNITED NATIONS
Context    
Morocco has in recent years seen relative stability and an incremental opening of democratic spaces. The 
adoption of law No. 31-13 on access to information, which came into force in 2020, was a crucial development 
which enables UNESCO to provide expertise and technical support to enhance the implementation of the 
law of the country. With support from the Multi-Donor Programme, the Organization has in recent years 
sought to strengthen the knowledge and capacities of rights-holders and duty-bearers, in support of this 
gradual opening and strengthening of democratic spaces in the country. 
Throughout 2022, the MDP made progress towards its objectives of enhancing the knowledge of duty-
bearers, such as judges and prosecutors, as well as rights-holders, among which journalists and academia, 
on international standards on freedom of expression, digital safety skills, fact-checking, and using national 
access to information laws. As Morocco held its General Elections in September 2022, which resulted in a 
change of government, MDP-supported activities also focused on establishing connections with the new 
government and relevant focal points. 
Morocco’s community radio stations are not entitled to license and cannot broadcast over conventional 
airwaves. There are no legal provisions in the Audiovisual Communication Law No. 77-03, which includes 
the High Authority of Broadcasting (HACA). Consequently, most community media operate exclusively 
online. This situation hinders community media development and adversely impacts access to information 
for communities in areas without internet coverage.  
A change in the Audiovisual Communication Law is necessary and requires substantial strategic advocacy 
based on a multi-stakeholder approach.  
CI-2023/FEJ/MDP/CS/15UNESCO’s Multi-donor Programme on 
Freedom of Expression and Safety of 
Journalists (MDP) action inMOROCCO OUTCOME 1 & 2At the same time, the rise of social media has enabled a new generation of community media, despite 
their informal status. This has created a new shift in the discussion of the future of community media in 
the country.  
Capacity building and gaining legal recognition for the community media sector is critical to reaching 
communities in all parts of the country. 
Areas of action and progress 
OUTCOME 1
OUTPUT 1: AWARENESS-RAISING AND ADVOCACY
• World Press Freedom Day 2022  was celebrated in Rabat together with the UN Information Centre for 
Morocco and the Moroccan Forum of Young Journalists (Forum Marocain des Jeunes Journalistes, or 
FMJJ)
• The 2022 International Day for Universal Access to Information  was celebrated in Rabat in 
collaboration with FMJJ.
OUTPUT 3: ENHANCING JOURNALISTS’ SAFETY
• The capacities of 47 Moroccan journalists were strengthened on digital safety  through a series of 
three training workshops. 
• The capacities of 44 journalism students were enhanced on digital safety and fact-checking  through 
a training workshop organized in partnership with Agence France Presse and the Higher Institute of 
Information and Communication (Institut Supérieur de l’Information et de la Communication).
• The capacities of 45 Moroccan journalists were reinforced on the right to access information  through 
a series of three training workshops. 
OUTPUT 4: POLICY ADVICE AND REINFORCEMENT OF DUTY BEARERS’ CAPACITIES 
• In partnership with the Superior Council for Judicial Power of Morocco, a regional conference entitled 
“Bringing together the Judges: the Role of Judges in Enhancing the Freedom of Expression in the Arab 
Region ” was held in Rabat in June 2022. The training gathered 40 judges and prosecutors from 10 
Arab countries, whose capacities were strengthened on international human rights standards and 
instruments.
• UNESCO’s Rabat Office participated in a consultation with FMJJ and the Moroccan Lawyers Club (Club 
des Avocats au Maroc) on legal protection for journalists and media law reform .  
OUTCOME 2
OUTPUT 1: SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY MEDIA DEVELOPMENT 
• UNESCO convened a series of capacity-building workshops in 2022 to support the development of 
the media sector. Emphasis was placed on technical skills in audio-visual production and journalistic 
writing skills. In addition, an understanding of human rights and fundamental freedoms was deepened, 
and practical skills were acquired to better master the equipment used by community media.  
MOROCCO OUTCOME 1 & 2• UNESCO organized a roundtable discussion to promote dialogue among various stakeholders, including 
government representatives and media organizations, on the role of community media in promoting 
human rights and media and information literacy. 
• UNESCO also ensured the participation of national and international media professionals and 
researchers in the fields of law, human rights, and communication sciences. This contributes to building 
the capacity of the media to provide adequate public services during environmental disasters and other 
vulnerable situations.
Key achievements
 Æ Twenty community media organizations in Morocco acquired audio-visual equipment and journalism 
skills needed to develop stories and communicate to a wide range of audiences on human rights, legal, 
media and information issues. This work was achieved through six capacity-building workshops and 
a roundtable discussion. 
 Æ A gender-sensitive approach was applied in the implementation of the project by ensuring gender 
balance in the selection of female trainers and participants.
 Æ The “Bringing together the Judges” conference constituted the first extension of UNESCO’s Judges 
Initiative to the Arab States region. Discussions held during the conference served as a basis to draft 
a series of recommendations, which were adopted by participants on the last day of the event. In 
addition, this regional event generated interest in organizing follow-up national trainings. One was 
held in Tunisia in 2022, and more are foreseen to take place in 2023 in Yemen, Morocco and Jordan.
 Æ A letter of intent was signed between UNESCO and the Superior Council of Judicial Power of Morocco, 
with the aim of improving the capacities of Moroccan judicial actors on international standards of 
freedom of expression.
Challenges, risks and remedial actions    
A change in the Audiovisual Communication Law is necessary to give community radio stations broadcast 
licenses. There will need to be substantial strategic advocacy based on a multi-stakeholder approach 
involving community media, the La Haute autorité de la communication audiovisuelle (HACA), relevant 
ministries, commercial media, journalists, and community leaders.   
 
There is strong demand for training in community media as indicated by the 200 applicants for the 
workshops. Future workshops should include a train-the-trainers modality to reach more people and 
support sustainability in the sector.   
Several activities pertaining to capacity-building for judicial operators and duty-bearers had to be 
rescheduled to 2023. For example, an activity on the right to access information foreseen to be organized 
jointly with the Ministry of Justice was rescheduled several times due to the unavailability of the Ministry. MOROCCO OUTCOME 1 & 2Forthcoming actions
Partners are organising a follow-up session at the Assises du Journalisme which will take place in 
November 2024 in Tunis, Tunisia. This will be an opportunity to showcase the project and reach out to 
more interested parties and potential donors. 
In 2023, UNESCO will continue to conduct advocacy around the International Days and to strengthen 
the capacities of Moroccan journalists on safety, disinformation, and fact-checking. These activities on 
fact-checking will expand in 2023 to include the Ministry of Communication, the Moroccan Press Council 
and the International Center for Journalists, who have all expressed interest in conducting large-scale 
capacity-building for journalists in different regions of the country. The Embassy of the Netherlands has 
also expressed interest in supporting these trainings.
In addition, two activities which were foreseen to take place in 2022 were postponed to 2023, namely 
capacity-building for public information officers and RTI focal points of public authorities, and a national 
training of judicial operators in Morocco, in collaboration with the Superior Council of Judicial Power.
MOROCCO OUTCOME 1 & 2