Syria
Israel
Lebanon
THE BOUNDARIES AND NAMES SHOWN AND THE DESIGNATIONS USED ON THIS MAP DO NOT IMPLY OFFICIAL ENDORSEMENT OR ACCEPTANCE BY THE UNITED NATIONS
Context    
Lebanon has in recent years been marred by economic crises, the Beirut Port explosions, nationwide 
demonstrations, and deep political polarization; a situation which has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 
pandemic and which has contributed to the spread of disinformation and hate speech. In this context, 
the electoral cycle of 2022 appeared particularly critical, as Lebanese citizens prepared to elect their 
representatives in Parliament, which would then proceed to elect the country’s President.
Free and independent media play crucial role in providing reliable information to citizens and in debunking 
disinformation, a role which is especially important during electoral cycles as journalists help ensure that 
such processes are open, free, and fair through their watchdog role. In support of media freedom and access 
to information during the elections and beyond, UNESCO, through the Multi-Donor Programme, began 
supporting in 2022 a process to reform the country’s media law and align it with international standards. 
CI-2023/FEJ/MDP/CS/14UNESCO’s Multi-donor Programme on 
Freedom of Expression and Safety of 
Journalists (MDP) action inLEBANON OUTCOME 1The country’s current law was adopted in 1962 and has not been adapted to new and digital media, leaving 
several of its provisions open for interpretation. In addition, while a reform had been proposed in previous 
years, the draft text has been sitting with parliamentary committees for over a decade.
In parallel to these efforts to help reform Lebanon’s media legal framework, support was also provided for 
the monitoring of TV coverage of the elections together with the Maharat Foundation, and the capacities of 
a cohort of young journalists and journalism students were strengthened on safety and electoral coverage. 
Areas of action and progress 
OUTPUT 3: ENHANCING JOURNALISTS’ SAFETY
• The capacities of a cohort of 18 young journalists and media students were strengthened on online, 
offline, and psychological safety as well as balanced electoral coverage and gender-responsive media 
content. 
OUTPUT 4: POLICY ADVICE AND REINFORCEMENT OF DUTY BEARERS’ CAPACITIES 
• In support of the 2022 Lebanese parliamentary elections, a 6-month monitoring study was conducted 
together with the Maharat Foundation  (November 2021 – April 2022) on how seven leading TV 
stations covered the elections, taking into consideration various factors such as the distribution of 
media time among political forces, the position of women in addressing this topic and hate speech, 
among others. Six reports were published as a result: five monthly reports, and a consolidated report 
covering the period from the beginning of February 2022 to the date of the election . Among its findings 
were that traditional political parties still dominate the media scene, that female candidates did not 
have equal access to television, and that electoral education materials for voters were limited to 0.13% 
of the total coverage of issues related to electoral affairs.  
• In an effort to bring Lebanon’s media legal framework up-to-date, policy advice was provided to revise 
a draft media law  that had been sitting with parliamentary committees for close to a decade and 
align it with international standards. For this purpose, support was provided for the review of the draft 
by national and international legal experts, and consultations were conducted to gather input from 
different stakeholder groups, including journalists, media institutions and syndicates, academia and 
civil society organizations. In parallel, advocacy efforts were carried out with parliamentary committees 
to encourage the tabling of this issue in parliament.
Key achievements
 Æ Trainings for young journalists and monthly monitoring reports helped increase free, ethical, and 
balanced media coverage around the elections across different media platforms.
 Æ An updated draft of the proposed media law is ready to be shared with parliamentary committees. 
LEBANON OUTCOME 1Challenges, risks and remedial actions
The security, political and socio-economic situation of Lebanon created a number of uncertainties during 
the implementation of activities in 2022. This notably engendered delays with regards to work on media 
law reform. Nevertheless, UNESCO’s credibility, neutrality and convening power allowed its Beirut Office 
to mobilize resources and personnel to move ahead with this exercise and produce updated versions of 
the draft law.
Forthcoming actions
Policy advice work around media law reform will continue into 2023, and the new draft law will be 
presented to parliamentary committees. Support to media’s role during elections will likewise continue 
ahead of the 2023 municipal elections. 
In parallel, building on previous work, additional actions will target young journalists and media students, 
including the elaboration of modules on investigative journalism to be integrated into the curricula of 
Lebanese universities to support a culture of transparency and accountability.LEBANON OUTCOME 1