Angola Zimbabwe
Botswana
South Africa
Namibia
THE BOUNDARIES AND NAMES SHOWN AND THE DESIGNATIONS USED ON THIS MAP DO NOT IMPLY OFFICIAL ENDORSEMENT OR ACCEPTANCE BY THE UNITED NATIONS
Context
Namibia has long enjoyed one of the most favourable environments for media freedom on the African 
content, as is demonstrated by the country’s repeatedly high scores in yearly press freedom rankings by specialized international NGOs. Freedom of the media is protected by Namibia’s constitution, and the country facilitated the adoption of the historic 3 May 1991 “Windhoek Declaration for the Development of a Free, Independent and Pluralistic Press”, which paved the way for 3 May to be recognized as World Press Freedom Day by the United Nations. 
In 2021, the global conference celebrating World Press Freedom Day was held in Windhoek, and a new 
Windhoek+30 Declaration was adopted, taking forward the spirit of the original 1991 Declaration while also taking into account recent challenges and evolutions of the media ecosystem. 
2018 - 2021 Quadrennial Report. Country summaries. Multidonor Programme on Freedom of Expression and Safety of Journalists NAMIBIA OUTCOME 1
CI-2022/FEJ/MDP/CS/7UNESCO's Multi- donor Program me on 
Freedom of Exp ression and Saf ety of 
Journalists (MDP) action in
2018 - 2021 Quadrennial Report. Country summaries - Multidonor Programme on Freedom of Expression and Safety of JournalistsOne important challenge which however persists in Namibia is the absence of a right to information law, 
which limits the dissemination of public information and the full exercise of investigative journalism. The 
adoption of such legislation would also promote transparency, accountability, and effective governance of 
all public and private bodies. While an ATI bill was tabled in Parliament in July 2020, a lack of understanding 
of some of its provisions led to slow progress. There was therefore a need to amplify awareness and 
education efforts on access to information in general. 
Namibia was thus added as a beneficiary country under the MDP in the second quarter of 2021, with the 
aim of reviewing the current draft bill and of increasing awareness on the right to access information by 
mobilizing government, civil society, and the Namibian public to take ownership and contribute to the 
achievement of SDG target 16.10. Actions deployed for this purpose were aligned with the global theme of 
WPFD 2021, “Information as a Public Good” and with the Windhoek+30 Declaration.
To this end, UNESCO supported the Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology (MICT) 
in conducting ATI public consultations and in rolling out an awareness-raising campaign in all 14 regions 
of Namibia. The approach chosen was to simplify the terminology of the draft ATI bill and of access to 
information in general as well as to include local indigenous languages to ensure broader participation 
and reach. Technical support was also supported for the improvement of the draft bill in December 2021. 
Following this first phase, UNESCO will support the MICT in conducting an ATI readiness assessment of 
5 local institutions in 2022. 
Areas of action and progress
AWARENESS-RAISING AND ADVOCACY
The main conference celebrating World Press Freedom Day 2021 was held in Windhoek, Namibia. It 
welcomed over 3.000 participants from 150 countries, over the course of 40 sessions featuring 250 
speakers. Among the key outcomes of the conference were the adoption of Windhoek+30 Declaration, 
which contains recommendations to nurture diverse, viable and independent media; the launch of the 
UNESCO-ICFJ study on online violence against women journalists; the launch of a WTR issue brief on the 
transparency of online platforms; the production of recommendations through the holding of 6 Regional 
Forums; and the launch of the Global Drive for Media Freedom and Safety of Journalists.
During the public consultations and awareness-raising campaign on access to information of September 
and October 2021, UNESCO supported the organization of a series of pop-up events and stakeholder 
meetings led by the Deputy Minister of Information, Communication and Technology. These events 
reached 1.128 people physically across all 14 regions of Namibia. The campaign notably addressed gender 
disparities and highlighted how ATI can reduce inequalities and facilitate empowerment. Following these 
activities, a final recommendation report was submitted to the Parliament. Participants included Regional 
Governors, Constituency Councillors, Local Authority Councillors, Traditional Authority Leaders, Heads 
of Delegated Functions of Ministries, CSOs, community members, as well as tertiary institutions in some 
regions.  This was done with the support of the MICT’s regional offices, the 14 regional councils of Namibia, 
ISOC Namibia, Law Reform, the Namibia National Students Organization (NANSO) and the UNESCO 
National Commission of Namibia. 
NAMIBIA OUTCOME 1Key achievements
 Æ The consultations and awareness-raising campaign on the ATI bill enabled citizens, regional councillors 
and parliamentarians to better understand the provisions of the bill and the necessity to adopt such 
legislation, thereby accelerating the adoption and promulgation of the draft bill.
 Æ These activities helped to reaffirm the commitment of duty-bearers and right-holders to engage in the 
review and adoption process of an ATI bill, with a view to enhance participatory democracy.
Challenges, risks and remedial actions
Insufficient coordination between central and regional government limited the circulation of invitations to 
ensure that different communities were well represented. The implementing team at UNESCO Windhoek 
urged the MICT to address this issue by hosting regular meetings with regional authorities, which improved 
the issue over time. 
Another challenge encountered was the unclear division of responsibilities between stakeholders in 
relation to responding to queries about the bill and to the development of the final recommendation report 
submitted to the Parliament. An internal communications channel was therefore created to improve 
coordination among participating stakeholders, as well as to provide regular feedback and updates on the 
project. 
Forthcoming actions
Building on 2021 activities, the government of Namibia is planning to conduct an ATI readiness assessment 
of 5 local institutions as a pilot in 2022, with the support of UNESCO’s MDP. This will be done in anticipation 
of the adoption of the ATI bill to ensure its smooth implementation in the near future. For this purpose, the 
UNESCO survey on access to information will be adapted to the Namibian context, and an online course 
on administering the adapted questionnaire to additional national institutions will be developed. 
In parallel to this, UNESCO will provide technical assistance to improve the draft bill and support its 
implementation once promulgated. 
2018 - 2021 Quadrennial Report. Country summaries. Multidonor Programme on Freedom of Expression and Safety of Journalists NAMIBIA OUTCOME 1