 
 
28  SEP  International Day for  
Universal  
Access to  
Information  2022  
Artificial Intelligence, e -Governance and Access to Information  #AccessToInfoDay      
#RightToKnow  
Concept Note for the Celebration of the International Day for 
Universal Access to I nformation ( IDUAI ) 202 2 
CI-2022/IDUAI/2022/CN/4  
 
Slogan:  Artificial Intelligence, e-Governance and Access to Information  
Organizer:  UNESCO;  
Other partners:  UN agencies, Member States, civil society organizations, professional 
networks & experts;  
Date:  28 and 29 September 2022;  
Global Celebrations v enue : Tashkent, Uzbekistan.  
 
Executive summary  
Artificial Intelligence and e-Governance can play an important role to improve access to 
information in our digital world. They can help bridge the digital divide, by giving citizens access 
to tailor -made  and accessible information. They can assure service s that are more efficient .  
Citizens can access public sector information and services nearly instantly.  Making government 
services digital enhances transparency and accessibility.  
 
However, these developments also raise questions about fundamental rights and ethical use of 
Artificial Intelligence and e-Governance by public institutions.  Since Artificial Intelligence uses 
citizen data, how do we protect the privacy of citizens?  Because Artificial Intelligence can 
determine what information we access, on w hich ethical principles is this determined?  
 
Stakeholders need to pay due attention so that the use of e-Governance and Artificial Intelligence 
builds trust, ensures inclusion, protects human rights and assures the participation of citizens. 
This can only be done if citizens have open access to the internet and to tailor -made content in 
their language and if they have the skills to use the services.  
 
The 2022 edition of the International Day for Universal Access to Information (IDUAI) will be an 
opportunity  to discuss e-Governance and Artificial Intelligence with a view to assuring the Right 
to Access Information.  The theme will enable discussions about both the benefits and risks of e-
Governance and Artificial Intelligence.  Practical tools and best practi ses will also be discussed, 
especially in view of the presentation of policy guidelines for public sector information and a  
 
28  SEP  International Day for  
Universal  
Access to  
Information  2022  
Artificial Intelligence, e -Governance and Access to Information  #AccessToInfoDay      
#RightToKnow  
declaration that will affirm the right to information against the backdrop of good governance 
principles.   
 
Themes  
The theme of this year highlight s the opportunities of digital governance and Artificial 
Intelligence in favour of developing resilient societies and an enabling environment for access 
to information. It will look at ways to leverage partnerships and internati onal cooperation to 
facilitate knowledge -sharing under the common objective of achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals set out in the 2030 Agenda.  
 
Monitor and report progress on Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) Indicator 16.10.2  
UNESCO, via its Int ernational Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC), has been 
mandated by its Member States to monitor and report progress on Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG) Indicator 16.10.2  on Public Access to Information.  Every year, UNESCO conducts a Survey on 
Public Access to Information to track progress on the adoption and implementation of  
“constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information”. The 2022 
survey gathered responses from 122 countries. This theme  will exp lore trends gathered from the 
2022 survey and explore synergies with other initiatives to gather data related to SDG 16.  
 
Inclusive approaches for access to information  
If the digital divide is fuelled by social and economic inequalities, it can also widen the gap by creating 
further barriers to good public governance implementation, including the right to access to 
information.  However, the digital divide can also be na rrowed by implementing e-Governance 
initiatives that incorporate the development of applications and online content to enable and 
encourage self -sufficiency, participation and collaboration.  Following the 13th edition of the 
International Conference of In formation Commissioners on access to information, participation, and 
inclusion in the digital age, it is important to debate the role of e-Governance and Artificial 
Intelligence, exploring how to turn them into an ally for promoting inclusive approaches fo r access to 
information.  
 
Civic space, accountability and public participation  in digital era  
As public bodies make increasing use of digital solutions, with Artificial Intelligence being used to 
support e-Governance systems and to aid decision making, it  is essential that these processes are 
subject to the same transparency and accountability as traditional administrative processes. The  
 
28  SEP  International Day for  
Universal  
Access to  
Information  2022  
Artificial Intelligence, e -Governance and Access to Information  #AccessToInfoDay      
#RightToKnow  
digitalisation of government services is also still partial, with a paucity of data in some sectors of 
government and to o few decisions benefiting from data -driven evidence.  Drawing on the 
conclusions of the 2021 Open Government Partnership Global Summit, which underline d the 
importance of civic space, accountability and public participation  in digital era , it is important  
to get a clearer picture of the current state of digitally driven governance and will identify specific 
challenges and recommendations for action by UN bodies, governments, and civil society.  
 
Policy Guidelines for the Development and Promotion of Govern mental Public Domain 
Information  
The updated version of UNESCO’s ‘Policy Guidelines for the Development and Promotion of 
Governmental Public Domain Information’  will be presented for discussion  during this years 
celebrations .  The purpose of the Policy Gui delines is to build impetus in the development, 
promotion, production, dissemination, preservation, and use of public sector information, with 
particular attention to information in digital form. It recommends that information produced by 
public entities i n all branches and at all levels should be publicly accessible, unless clearly defined 
as an exemption.   
 
Open Data Guidelines  
UNESCO and its Information for All Programme (IFAP) , in collaboration with the International 
Research Centre on AI (IRCAI) and UNESCO Chairs on AI and Data Sciences, have developed 
Open Data Guidelines to apprise governments of the value of openness of data for AI and 
empowering  them through a set of steps  to take action.  The Guidelines outline concrete steps 
in the preparation, opening and follow -up for reuse of data.  Th is year’s celebrations will review 
the guidelines during the session, and the audience will be invited to provide its comments.   
 
Tashk ent Declaration  
The 2022 celebrations in Tashkent, Uzbekistan wil l adopt the Tashkent Declaration  that will 
reaffirm the commitment by Member States to recognising and respecting the fundamental 
right of access to information.  It will cover the principles  of good governance and issues raised 
by Artificial Intelligence and emerging technologies with regard to access to information.  It will 
also address recent developments, such as the increase in access to information national 
legislation, implementation mo dalities, the impact of digitalisation and the importance of 
access to information legal guarantees to be inclusive, especially for persons with disabilities 
and other marginalised groups.   
 
28  SEP  International Day for  
Universal  
Access to  
Information  2022  
Artificial Intelligence, e -Governance and Access to Information  #AccessToInfoDay      
#RightToKnow  
 
