Synthesis of Decisions  
on Access to Public Information  
in Latin America
Daniel Ospina Celis 
Catalina Botero MarinoCommunication and Information  
Discussion Papers
22
ISSN: 2301-1424
Published in 2023 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (7, place de Fontenoy, 
75352 Paris 07 SP, France) and the UNESCO Regional Bureau for Sciences in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
UNESCO Office in Montevideo (Luis Piera 1992, Piso 2, 11200 Montevideo, Uruguay). 
© UNESCO 2023
ISSN 2301-1424
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to 
be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://www.unesco. org/open-access/
terms-use-ccbysa-sp).
Original title: “Síntesis de decisiones de acceso a la información pública en América Latina” published in 2022 by 
the Regional Bureau for Sciences in Latin America and the Caribbean / UNESCO Montevideo Office, (Luis Piera 
1992, Piso 2, 11200 Montevideo, Uruguay).
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expres -
sion of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country , territory, city or 
area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of 
organizations which coordinated and supported this work, and do not commit them. 
Authors: Daniel Ospina Celis / Catalina Botero Marino
Coordination: Rosa María González / Marcos Mendiburu
Graphic and cover design and typeset: María Noel Pereyra
Cover graphics: Conny Schneider - Unsplash / Annie Spratt - Unsplash
Synthesis of Decisions  
on Access to Public Information  
in Latin America
Daniel Ospina Celis
Catalina Botero Marino5
An Invitation to Debate
More than three centuries ago, British thinker, poet and politician John Milton wrote one of the most important 
and well-known texts against censorship: Areopagitica. It was one of the catalysts for an important debate 
on the protection of freedom of expression and freedom of the press.
Many centuries before him, the Greeks had strongly emphasized on the importance of the doxa (opinion) 
for democracy.
The debates on the vital importance of freedom of expression and access to information and knowledge 
for democracies and for the development, protection and promotion of other human rights are by no means 
new.
However, there is no doubt that the advent of the new information and communication technologies (ICTs), 
particularly the expansion of the Internet, offers a unique and original dimension to these discussions.
The impact on the system for the protection and promotion of human rights, on the consolidation of 
democracies, on development, decision-making, public policies, and, at the end of the day, on the everyday 
life of every citizen, is unprecedented.
The progress of knowledge societies is intimately related to the deepening of the debates on the right 
to freedom of expression and universal access to information in an increasingly connected world. Press 
freedom, media development, privacy, the role of ICTs in public policies, open governments, documents’ 
protection, and media and information literacy, are just a few of the many issues on the agenda.
In order to deepen the role of the Organization as a laboratory of ideas, UNESCO Office in Montevideo 
offers its stakeholders these Cuadernos de Discusión de Comunicación e Información (Communication and 
Information Discussion Papers).
Written by leading experts from each field, the main objective of these publications is to provide inputs so 
that decision makers and public policy makers can take into account different angles of the current issues 
on the international agenda, always having the existing international standards as a reference.
These papers do not intend to become the final word. Instead, they aim to contribute to an ever increasing, 
plural and well-informed debate on key issues of yesterday, today and tomorrow.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...6
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
An Invitation to Debate  ............................................................................................................................................................ 5
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7
1. Jurisprudence of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ...............................................................................  8
2. Decisions on the Principle of Maximum Disclosure .................................................................................................  9
3. Decisions on Mandated Bodies by the Law  ...............................................................................................................  10
4. Decisions on the Obligation to Produce or Capture Information ......................................................................  11
5. Decisions on Harm Test .....................................................................................................................................................  13
6. Decisions on Information Related to Human Rights Violations .........................................................................  14
7. Decisions on Information Included in Court Records .............................................................................................  15
8. Decisions on Information Held by the Armed Forces .............................................................................................  17
9. Decisions on State Budget Information ......................................................................................................................  19
10. Decisions on Public Servants’ Information ..............................................................................................................  20
11. Decisions on Information Related to the Implementation of Public Policies .............................................  22
12. Decisions on Information Related to COVID-19 ....................................................................................................  23
About the Authors ...................................................................................................................................................................  26Table of contents7
Introduction
In the first two decades of this century, Latin America has made significant progress in the exercise of 
the right to information. In this context, the bodies guaranteeing access to information established in the 
different legislations had to deal with a significant volume of appeals filed by requesters dissatisfied with 
the denials of information by the mandated bodies by the Law, which has resulted in the adoption of a set 
of decisions that constitute a body of jurisprudence relevant to the countries of the region. In this regard, 
the 2021 report of the Regional Alliance for Freedom of Expression and Information “ Access to Information 
in the XXI Century: Current Situation and Lessons Learned from Latin America” , which includes a regional 
analysis of the implementation of access to public information in Latin America during the past 20 years, 
highlights among its advances the development of jurisprudence in this area. As evidenced in the present 
document, this has occurred not only at the national level, through resolutions by the oversight bodies and 
judgments of the judiciaries, but also at the regional level, through decisions of the Inter-American Court of 
Human Rights, establishing strong standards in favour of open access to information.
As stated in the Inter-American Model Law 2.0 on Access to Public Information, the role of the bodies 
guaranteeing the right of access to information is key to the effective operation of national systems regarding 
access to public information. Two of the main functions of the oversight body are: (i) the monitoring of 
compliance with the corresponding law through the development of indicators to measure its correct 
application, and (ii) the resolution of disputes, interpreting the law in the matter. While UNESCO, as the 
custodian agency of the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) indicator 16.10.2, contributes to the first 
function through the implementation of an annual survey among member countries and the preparation 
of a global report which is available to the public, this document aims to strengthen the capacities of the 
oversight bodies regarding the second function.
Commissioned by the UNESCO Regional Office in Montevideo, this document, which has been written by 
Catalina Botero and Daniel Ospina, of the Los Andes University in Colombia, and has benefited from feedback 
from a group of bodies guaranteeing the right to information in Latin America, consists of a compilation of 
decisions of oversight bodies and judgments of judicial courts of the countries of the region.
This document is intended to contribute to the work of the working group on jurisprudence of the Transparency 
and Access to Information Network, which encompasses the oversight bodies of Ibero-American countries, 
and of the International Conference of Information Commissioners (ICIC). The authors are also confident 
that this document will be useful to judicial officers, as well as to law professors and students from different 
academic institutions within the region.
.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...8
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
1.  Jurisprudence of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 
In 2006, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights became the first international court to 
recognize the existence of the right of access to public information as an autonomous right in the 
case of Claude Reyes et al. v. Chile. This emblematic case not only was important at the time, but 
continuous to be relevant today, and it is therefore worth detailing its origins, content, and scope.
The case arises from a request for information made by Marcel Claude Reyes, Sebastián Cox 
Urrejola and Arturo Longton Guerrero to the Foreign Investment Committee of Chile on the Trillium 
forestry company and the Río Cóndor project, a project of deforestation and exploitation of forest 
resources that could eventually impact the environment and prevent sustainable development in 
Chile. They received only partial information, and the State did not explain why it did not allow 
the requesters to access all the information. In view of the State’s refusal, the petitioners turned to 
the Chilean courts, but they were unable to obtain all the information requested. Therefore, they 
resorted to the Inter-American System of Human Rights.
In deciding on the case, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights established that “in a democratic 
society, it is essential that the State authorities are governed by the principle of maximum 
disclosure, which establishes the presumption that all information is accessible, subject to a 
limited system of exceptions”.1 Restrictions, such as limitations on human rights, must have been 
established by law to ensure that they are not at the discretion of public authorities; must respond 
to a purpose allowed by the American Convention; and must be necessary in a democratic society, 
consequently, they must be intended to satisfy a compelling public interest. “It corresponds to the 
State to show that it has complied with the above requirements when establishing restrictions to 
the access to the information it holds”.2 As the Chilean State failed to meet said burden of proof, 
the Inter-American Court of Human Rights declared that Chile had violated Article 13 of the 
American Convention on Human Rights (hereinafter, the Convention or the ACHR) and ordered 
to provide the petitioners with the information. It also ordered the State to take the necessary 
measures to guarantee the right of access to information, including adapting its domestic law and 
training the State bodies, authorities, and agents responsible for responding to requests for access 
to information on the parameters set out in the judgment. Following the judgment, Chile modified 
its legal framework to adequately regulate access to public information and created the Council 
for Transparency, a public entity charged with guaranteeing of this right.3
A few years after the case of Claude Reyes, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights reiterated 
the precedent it had established on that occasion. In 2010, when ruling on the case of Gomes Lund 
et al. (“Guerrilha do Araguaia”) v. Brazil, the Court recalled that the ACHR “protects the right of every 
person to request access to information under State control”.4 On that occasion, the Court stated 
that this is the “the right of persons to receive said information and the positive obligation of the 
State to provide it, in a way that the person will be able to know this information or receive a well-
1 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Claude Reyes et al. v. Chile. Judgment of September 19, 2006. 
Series C No. 151, par. 92.
2 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Claude Reyes et al. v. Chile. Judgment of September 19, 2006. 
Series C No. 151, par. 93.
3 Chile. Law No. 20.285 of August 11, 2008. Official Bulletin of August 20, 2008.
4 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Gomes Lund et al. (“Guerrilha do Araguaia”) v. Brazil. Judgment of 
September 24, 2010. Series C No. 219, par. 197.9
founded response when, under one of the reasons permitted by the Convention, the State is able 
to limit access to it in that specific case.5 
Most of the closing courts in the countries of the region have followed the standards set out in 
Claude Reyes when deciding on cases related to access to public information. The following is a 
thematic selection of recent judgments and decisions by oversight bodies related to the right of 
access to information, its content, and limits.
2. Decisions on the Principle of Maximum Disclosure 
The principle of maximum disclosure states that “access by people to public information should be 
maximized, with very limited exceptions. To that extent, the general rule should be that all public 
information is accessible, and only very exceptionally can access be denied to certain specific 
types of information held by the State”.6 According to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, 
this principle is indispensable in a democratic society because it “establishes the presumption that 
all information is accessible, subject to a restricted system of exceptions”.7
Because of its central importance to understand the right of access to information, the courts and 
oversight bodies in most of the countries in the region have applied the principle of maximum 
transparency as the main criterion for resolving on cases related to access to public information. 
In many cases, the principle based on which transparency is the rule and secrecy is the exception, 
is the cornerstone of the decision. Some of these cases are developed in other sections of this 
document, but it is worth mentioning certain cases that are illustrative to understand the type of 
decisions that the principle of maximum transparency makes possible.
In Costa Rica, for example, the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice has 
extensively interpreted the principle of maximum disclosure in cases involving environmental 
information. In 2018, the Constitutional Chamber ordered the Ministry of Environment and Energy 
to provide an individual information on the topographic profiles of the mining activity in a region.8 
The court based its decision on the fact that environmental information should be governed by the 
principle of maximum disclosure. It reached that conclusion after a harmonious interpretation of 
the right of access to information, the Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration, the Aarhus Convention, 
and the content of the right to a healthy environment established by the Inter-American Court 
of Human Rights in Advisory Opinion OC-23/17. This precedent was cited and reaffirmed by the 
same Constitutional Chamber in 2021, in a decision ordering the delivery to the petitioner of the 
protocols on which the reform of the Regulation for agricultural aviation activities was based.9
In Brazil, the Supreme Federal Court faced in 2011 the need to reconcile two apparently 
conflicting constitutional principles: The disclosure principle and privacy.10 The case arose after 
the precautionary measures that, at the request of a trade union, prevented the implementation 
of the decision of the municipality of Sao Paulo to publish on its website, based on the legislation 
5 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Gomes Lund et al. (“Guerrilha do Araguaia”) v. Brazil. Judgment of 
September 24, 2010. Series C No. 219, par. 197.
6 Caja de herramientas para escuelas judiciales iberoamericanas (UNESCO 2017).
7 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Gomes Lund et al. (“Guerrilha do Araguaia”) v. Brazil. Judgment of 
September 24, 2010. Series C No. 219, par. 199.
8 Costa Rica. Constitutional Chamber. Resolution No. 20355-2018 of December 7, 2018.
9 Costa Rica. Constitutional Chamber. Resolution No. 20267-2021 of September 10, 2021
10 Brazil. Federal Supreme Court. Suspensão de segurança 3902-2011 of June 9, 2011.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...10
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
on transparency, the name, duties, and salary of all its public servants. Faced with the apparent 
conflict between the privacy of the officers and transparency as a State value, the Supreme Federal 
Court had to decide whether the decision to suspend the disclosure had been appropriate.
After describing the State duty to disclose public information as an “eminently republican duty 
because the management of public affairs should be carried out with the maximum transparency, ” 
the Court found that, on this specific case, the principle of disclosure should prevail. The 
remuneration, positions, and duties of public servants is information of public interest which does 
not have the potential to impact the privacy of individuals. On the other hand, “the predominance 
of the principle of administrative disclosure is but one of the noblest ways of making the Republic 
a reality as a form of government. ” For this reason, the Court ordered the suspension of the effects 
of those judicial decisions that had prevented the disclosure of the information.
The Constitutional Court of Peru has also recognized the importance of the principle of maximum 
disclosure. As the Court has stated in a 2010 decision, “this is a principle of constitutional 
relevance, implicit in the model of the democratic and social rule of law and the republican form 
of government”.11 It also indicated that “the implementation of the principle of transparency helps 
to combat corruption in the State and, at the same time, it constitutes an effective tool against 
the impunity of power by allowing the people to have access to the way in which the delegation 
of power is exercised. ” In this line of thinking, the Court ordered to provide the interested party 
with certified copies of the technical file of a publicly-funded infrastructure work. Likewise, the 
Courts and oversight bodies of Argentina, Chile, Colombia, and Mexico, among others, have used 
the principle of maximum disclosure to resolve cases on access to information.
3. Decisions on Mandated Bodies by the Law
The question of who are mandated bodies by the Law is fundamental to the guarantee of the right 
of access to information. Only those public or private persons who are guided by the principle 
of maximum disclosure shall be bounded to deliver the information in their possession. Both 
the Inter-American Model Law on Access to Public Information of 2010 (Article 3) and the Inter-
American Model Law 2.0 on Access to Public Information of 2020 (Article 2) establish general 
rules in this regard. The latter establishes that the mandated bodies by the Law are: (i) any public 
authority belonging to any branch of government; (ii) independent bodies or entities owned or 
controlled by the government; and (iii) private entities performing public duties or receiving and 
executing public funds.
In addition, the national legislation of most countries in the region includes provisions in this 
regard, specifically identifying the entities covered by the transparency and access to information 
legislation. However, the judges and oversight bodies have been responsible for applying such 
rules to unconventional mandated bodies by the Law or for extending the list.
For example, the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica established 
in its decision of March 18, 2011, citing precedents dating back to 2003, that public agencies 
and their bodies, State-owned companies, and “private persons who permanently or temporarily 
exercise a public power or competence”, are mandated bodies by the Law regarding the right of 
access to public information.12 For this reason, the Constitutional Chamber ordered the Ministry 
of Labour and Social Security to provide the requester with a list of legal and natural persons 
11 Peru. Constitutional Court. File No. 00565-2010. Judgment of September 5, 2010.
12 Costa Rica. Constitutional Chamber. Resolution No. 03320-2011 of March 18, 201111
who have been punished for not complying with the payment of a minimum wage. In Peru, the 
Constitutional Court found that a company providing the public electricity service is legally bound 
regarding the right of access to information and ordered it to provide the information requested 
by the petitioners.13
In Argentina, the Supreme Court of Justice has established that individuals exercising public duties14 
and companies whose capital is mainly public are mandated bodies by the Law regarding the right 
of access to information.15 More recently, the Agency for Access to Public Information has established 
that Telefónica de Argentina S.A., a company that provides the public telecommunications service, 
is a legally bound subject regarding national legislation on transparency.16 The Agency based 
its resolution both on the case of Claude Reyes and the Inter-American Model Law on Access to 
Public Information. The Agency ordered Telefónica de Argentina S.A. to provide the petitioners 
with information on the number of users to whom it provides its telephone and Internet services 
in the vulnerable neighbourhoods of the country’s capital. In December 2021, the judiciary, through 
the Federal Contentious-Administrative Chamber, confirmed the decision of the oversight body.17
The bodies guaranteeing access to information have also been concerned with establishing who 
are legally bound entities. In 2021, the Council for Transparency of Chile determined that public 
and private universities are mandated bodies regarding the right of access to public information 
as they provide the public service of education.18
4. Decisions on the Obligation to Produce or Capture Information 
The right of access to public information also implies the obligation of State authorities to 
produce or capture information for the performance of their duties. When a legally bound subject 
must capture or systematize certain information for the proper performance of its duties, the 
absence of such information cannot be accepted as a response to requests for access. In its 2013 
Annual Report, the Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the IACHR has 
stated that the right to access to public information “applies to information that is in the custody, 
administration or possession of the State; information that the State produces, or information 
that it is legally required to produce; information in the possession of persons who exercise or 
manage public duties, services, or funds, solely with respect to those services, duties, or funds; and 
information that the State obtains, and that it is required to collect in the discharge of its duties. ”19
This has also been recognized by various national legislations in the region. The Colombian 
legislation, for example, when defining the object of the right, recognizes that it “entails the 
obligation to produce or capture public information. ”20 Judges and oversight bodies regarding 
access to public information have ordered mandated bodies by the Law to produce or systematize 
information in spite of the difficulties faced.
13 Peru. Constitutional Court. File No. 00390-2007-PHD/TC. Judgment of December 20, 2007.
14 Argentina. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation 917-2012.
15 Argentina. Federal Contentious-Administrative Chamber. File No. 2445-2015. Judgment of September 29, 2015.
16 Argentina. Agency for Access to Public Information. Resolution No. 175-2019 of September 16, 2019.
17 Argentina. Federal Contentious-Administrative Chamber. File No. 91-2020. Judgment of December 2, 2021.
18 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C4101-2021. August 31, 2021.
19 IACHR. Annual Report of the Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression 2013, p. 568.
20 Colombia. Law No. 1712 of 2014, Article 4.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...12
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
The Constitutional Court of Peru was one of the pioneering courts in this matter. In 2001, a citizen 
requested information on travel expenses incurred by former president Fujimori between 1990 
and 2000. Although the president’ office provided a statement of expenses, it was incomplete 
and inaccurate in the opinion of the requestor. When analyzing the case, the Constitutional Court 
of Peru found that “the right of access to information is not only affected when its release is 
denied, without constitutionally legitimate reasons, but also when the information provided is 
fragmented, outdated, incomplete, inaccurate. ”21 Mandated bodies by the Law should produce 
quality and complete information, regardless of the difficulties this may entail. In this line of 
thinking, the Court ordered the Executive Power to provide detailed information on the expenses 
incurred by the former president during his travels.
In Costa Rica, the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice ordered the Costa 
Rican Social Security Fund to produce and deliver wage information in digital format. The case 
arises from a citizen’s request for information on the salaries of all public servants in the country 
between 1990 and 2013. The petitioner explicitly requested the data in digital format. The Court 
considered that, in the light of the principle of maximum disclosure, the State should provide, 
to whoever may request it, the information that it has the obligation to hold in custody despite 
the difficulties that its search or systematization may entail. The Court highlighted that “the 
digitalization of public information requires a progressive adaptation according to the budgetary, 
technological and human resources capacities of each Administration, ” so the State must make 
efforts to achieve this.22
The Supreme Court of Panama has also ordered the production of information in multiple cases. 
In 2010, for example, it protected the petitioner’s right of access to information after the Ministry 
of Agricultural Development refused to provide the petitioner with a copy of a record because it 
had already been filed, which made it cumbersome to access it and there was no staff available 
to perform the task. In the Court’s view, the difficulty to obtain the information was not a valid 
argument for denying access.23 
More recently, in 2020, the same Court faced a case similar to the Peruvian case described above. 
A member of parliament asked the Land Transit and Transport Authority to provide a complete 
list of taxi quotas for each province, indicating the vehicle’s license plate number and owner. 
The entity provided an incomplete list, alleging that it did not have all the information and that 
systematizing said information was expensive, so the petitioner should request such information 
before other authorities. The Supreme Court of Panama found this response unsatisfactory and 
granted the Land Transit and Transport Authority five days to deliver the requested information to 
the petitioner in due form.24 
That same year, the National Institute of Transparency, Access to Public Information and Protection 
of Personal Data (INAI) of Mexico issued a resolution interpreting the obligation to produce 
information in a novel way. The petitioner requested, in Word (text) and MP3 (audio) format, the 
Executive Power labour policy for disabled persons and the annual budgets of the three previous 
presidential periods: Vicente Fox, Felipe Calderón and Enrique Peña Nieto. The legally bound 
subject provided only part of the information in Word (text) format. For INAI, the response was 
incomplete and did not consider the delivery format chosen by the petitioner: the MP3 format 
(audio). For this reason, it ordered the legally bound subject to deliver the missing information 
21 Peru. Constitutional Court. File No. 1797-2002. Judgment of January 29, 2003.
22 Costa Rica. Constitutional Chamber. Resolution No. 04037-2014 of March 21, 2014
23 Panama. Supreme Court of Justice. File No. 1068-2010. Judgment of December 27, 2011.
24 Panama. Supreme Court of Justice. File No. 394-2020. Judgment of September 8, 2020.13
and that all the information provided should also be produced in MP3 format (audio), not only as 
a guarantee of the right of access to public information of the petitioner, but because this format 
allows people with visual disabilities to access and know public information.25
The oversight bodies of Chile and Argentina have also ordered the production of information 
through their decisions. In 2022, for example, the Council for Transparency of Chile asked the Civil 
Registry and Identification Service to provide the petitioner with statistical information on the 
number of persons who have changed their name and sex under the Gender Identity Act, issued 
the previous year. The Council for Transparency rejected the entity’s arguments not to produce 
the information, as it did not put people’s privacy at risk, nor was it information that, considering 
its legal duties, the entity did not have at its disposal.26 In 2018, the Agency for Access to Public 
Information of Argentina determined that State entities have a duty to produce, process, and 
centralize relevant information necessary for the design, execution, and control of public policies.27 
The above decision came after a civil association asked the Ministry of Health for information on 
mental health facilities and this entity provided very little information.
5. Decisions on Harm T est
The right of access to information is subject to limitations in accordance with the Article 13.2 of 
the American Convention on Human Rights. These limitations should be exceptional and subject 
to restrictive interpretation. Additionally, they should be expressly enshrined in a law in the formal 
and material sense and aim to achieve one of the legitimate objectives under the American 
Convention. Restrictions on access to public information should also pass a proportionality test or 
harm test to be compatible with the standards set by the Inter-American Human Rights System. 
It must be demonstrated that: (i) there is a relationship to the legitimate objectives justifying 
the limitation; (ii) the disclosure of the information threatens to cause substantial, effective, and 
tangible harm to that legitimate objective; and (iii) the harm caused by the disclosure of the 
information is greater than the public interest in accessing said information. This harm test should 
be made by the State, and the courts and oversight bodies in the region have relied on it to decide 
on countless cases.
Most of the decisions examined in this document use the harm test as a guiding criterion to 
properly guarantee the right of access to information. However, some of them illustratively 
show the relevance of the harm test. For example, the Agency for Access to Public Information 
of Argentina found in 2018 that the Military House of the General Secretariat of the President’s 
Office the Nation had not demonstrated that the disclosure of the requested information would 
damage protected interests, so it ordered its release.28 The case arose from a request made by a 
civil society organization for access records to the Olivos Presidential Residence between 2016 
and 2018, showing the visits received by the president of the Republic. Although the Argentine 
government claimed that providing such information, even if anonymized, would jeopardize the 
security of the president, the body guaranteeing transparency considered that “the reasons why 
the information requested is covered by the exception are not properly justified” (…) nor is it 
explained how “it could jeopardize the security of the presidential family. ” For that reason, the 
Agency ordered the release of the requested information.
25 Mexico. INAI. RRA 14467-2020. Resolution of February 10, 2021.
26 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C1057-2022. Resolution of February 14, 2022.
27 Argentina. Agency for Access to Public Information. Resolution No. 153-2018 of November 26, 2018.
28 Argentina. Agency for Access to Public Information. Resolution No. 160-2018 of December 7, 2018.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...14
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
In Chile, both the judges and the Council for Transparency have relied on the inadequate use of the 
harm test to order the provision of the information requested by the citizens. In 2017, the Court of 
Appeal of Santiago considered that Carabineros de Chile had failed to satisfactorily demonstrate 
that the provision of information on expenditures and suppliers of deterrents used during the 
demonstrations would jeopardize national security.29 The Court was explicit in establishing that it 
was not enough to assert that the information was related to national security; it was necessary 
to prove that its disclosure would cause specific harm. In 2020, the oversight body reached a 
similar conclusion. Also, in a case in which information was requested on the elements used 
by Carabineros de Chile to control the demonstrations, the Court stated that the claim that its 
disclosure generically impacts national security does not comply with the standards of the right 
of access to information. According to the Transparency Council, the State “did not provide enough 
background information to imply a present or probable impact”; that is, it did not exhaust the 
harm test, thus violating the petitioner’s right of access to information.30
6. Decisions on Information Related to Human Rights Violations
While there are exceptions regarding access to public information, and the information may not 
be released to requesters fulfilling a high burden of proof, these exceptions have, in turn, a rule 
to consider: generally, they are not applicable when the information relates to serious human 
rights violations. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights established in the case of Myrna 
Mack Chang v. Guatemala that when it comes to information about human rights violations “the 
State authorities cannot resort to mechanisms such as official secret or confidentiality of the 
information, or reasons of public interest or national security, to refuse to supply the information 
required by the judicial or administrative authorities. ”31
This standard was applied by the First Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation 
of Mexico in deciding whether the information contained in the preliminary enquiries (a stage 
of the criminal investigation) was reserved. Although the Supreme Court recognized the validity 
of the reserved nature of this information because it protects the fair administration of justice, it 
established that, in cases of serious violations of human rights or crimes against humanity, the 
public interest of the information outweighs the potential impacts to the fair administration of 
justice.32 Specifically, it stated that “the reserved nature cannot be invoked when the preliminary 
enquiry investigates facts constituting serious violations of human rights or crimes against 
humanity. ” It also established that “the public interest in keeping the preliminary enquiry in reserve 
is outweighed by the interest of the society as a whole to know all the proceedings that are being 
carried out for the timely investigation, arrest, trial, and punishment of those responsible. ” For 
this reason, it ordered the Counsel-General’s Office to allow access to information and to grant 
certified copies of the preliminary enquiry in the case of Rosendo Padilla Pacheco, in which the 
Inter-American Court of Human Rights had already determined the existence of serious violations 
of human rights.33 
29 Chile. Court of Appeal of Santiago 618-2017. Judgment of July 13, 2017.
30 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C1341-2020. July 7, 2020.
31 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Myrna Mack Chang v. Guatemala. Judgment of November 25, 2003. 
Series C No. 101, par. 180.
32 Mexico. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation. Protection under review 168-2011. Judgment of November 30, 
2011.
33 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Padilla Pacheco v. Mexico. Judgment of November 23, 2009. Series 
C No. 209.15
In the same vein, the Administrative Court of Cundinamarca, in Colombia, had to determine whether 
the Special Operations Joint Command of the Ministry of National Defence had adequately denied 
access to the documents related to a military operation. Children who had been forcibly recruited 
by an outlawed group had died in that bombing. The court found that secrecy is not acceptable 
when it comes to information related to cases of human rights violations or crimes against 
humanity, even when the reservation in question is related to national security information.34 For 
this reason, it ordered the partial release of the information contained in the intelligence reports 
that served as the foundation for the operation, specifically the sections dealing with the presence 
of minors at the site of the bombing.
The same Inter-American Court of Human Rights established a clarification to the standard it 
had set in Myrna Mack Chang: when the information related to human rights violations is in the 
possession of a Truth Commission. In the case of Omar Humberto Maldonado Vargas et al. v. Chile,35 
the Court determined that the refusal of the National Commission on Political Prison and Torture, 
also known as the Valech Commission, to provide information to a court on the torture of some 
detainees was legitimate as the confidentiality of the information collected was provided for in 
the legislation, aimed at ensuring the success of the commission, was necessary to realize the 
right to the truth by offering more guarantees to those who testified, and was proportional as 
the restriction on access to information was not disproportionate in relation to the advantages 
obtained regarding transitional justice. This decision shows that even an exception such as the 
one concerning information on human rights violations can have limits: The rights of victims. The 
Council for Transparency of Chile came to a similar decision by refusing to deliver a digital copy 
of the Valech Commission’s database, considering that the reserved nature of this information is 
aimed at protecting the rights of the victims of State repression.36
7. Decisions on Information Included in Court Records 
Judges and bodies guaranteeing access to information from different countries have wondered if 
the information included in a court or administrative record is public information which citizens 
should have access to. In Costa Rica, the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice 
wondered if citizens should have access to documents included in a court record even if they 
are not part of the proceeding.37 Specifically, it had to resolve whether the Ministry of Health’s 
argument not providing information related to a clandestine landfill —that the document was 
included in a record in the Environmental Administrative Court and that the petitioner was not 
part of the proceedings—, met the standards of the right of access to information. In the opinion 
of the Chamber, such reasons are not valid arguments to deny access to the requested document, 
especially when it comes to matters of public interest. Thus, it ordered to provide the journalist 
with the requested information, although it did not rule out that there could be reasonable 
grounds for denying access.
In El Salvador, judges have also discussed the scope of the exception regarding access to information 
included in a court record. The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice, echoing 
the inter-American standards, determined in 2014 that the information included in a criminal 
34 Colombia. Administrative Court of Cundinamarca. File No. 250002341-2020. Judgment of July 3, 2020.
35 Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Case of Omar Humberto Maldonado Vargas et al. v. Chile. Judgment of 
September 2, 2015. Series C No. 300.
36 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C493-2020. Resolution of January 28, 2020.
37 Costa Rica. Constitutional Chamber. Resolution No. 12627-2017 of August 11, 2017.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...16
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
proceeding record is, in principle, public and can be reserved only in exceptional cases.38 In arguing 
that the information cannot be provided because of the existence of a legitimate exception, the 
State should consider the burden of proof that a harm test requires. In the specific case, the court 
determined that the criminal proceedings investigating corruption by a former president are not 
reserved and, therefore, citizens have the right to access all documents. Within a few years, the 
same court again granted access to information included in a criminal proceeding but in very 
different circumstances. In its judgment, the Constitutional Chamber determined that not allowing 
the reopening of a criminal proceeding in which a mass murder was investigated, violated both 
the right to the truth and the right of access to information. The court referred to the intrinsic link 
between both in that “the right to know the truth implies free access to objective information 
on facts that have violated fundamental rights and on the time, personal, material and territorial 
circumstances surrounding them. ”39 This implies that the victims should have the possibility to 
request and obtain information held by the State, even if it is included in a criminal record.
As it was stated in the previous section, the Supreme Court of Justice of Mexico has also contributed 
to this issue. In 2011, it analysed the validity of considering as reserved the information related to 
serious human rights violations included in a stage of the criminal investigation called “preliminary 
enquiries”. The Supreme Court recognized that, in theory, it is possible to consider as reserved the 
information included in preliminary enquiries in order to protect the fair administration of justice 
but determined that in cases of serious human rights violations or crimes against humanity, such a 
reservation was not sustained.40 The public interest to know the information outweighed the need 
to protect the fair administration of justice. Two years later, in 2013, the Supreme Court slightly 
modified its jurisprudence and opened a little more the door to the transparency of preliminary 
enquiries.41 This time, it determined that it was necessary to perform the proportionality test to 
establish whether access to information included on records could be limited, even when it comes 
to information not related to human rights. The court found that the rule according to which all 
the documents included in the preliminary enquiries are reserved was disproportionate.
In turn, the National Institute of Transparency, Access to Public Information and Protection of 
Personal Data (INAI) of Mexico determined that the requestor had the right to receive a copy of 
the complete records related to the investigations being carried out by the Prosecutor’s Office 
regarding the facts resulting from the rail accident on Line 12 of the public transport system (STC-
Metro) of Mexico City. For INAI, there is even a “greater public interest in disclosing the names 
of current or former public servants identified as accused in the above-mentioned investigation 
record. ”42
38 El Salvador. Supreme Court of Justice 506-2014. Judgment of June 13, 2014.
39 El Salvador. Supreme Court of Justice 558-2010. Judgment of November 11, 2016.
40 Mexico. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation. Protection Decision No. 168-2011. Judgment of November 30, 
2011
41 Mexico. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation. Protection Decision No. 173-2012. Judgment of February 6, 2013.
42 Mexico. INAI. RRA 7058-2021. Resolution of August 25, 2021.17
8. Decisions on Information Held by the Armed Forces 
The armed forces are also mandated regarding the right of access to public information. Although 
there are good reasons for national security issues to be classified as reserved, this situation has 
become widespread in the region, favouring a culture of opacity, and hindering State transparency 
in the defence sector. In Colombia, the Constitutional Court has made significant efforts to make 
security- and defence-related information transparent. In 2007, for example, it established that 
petitioners had the right to know the names and institutional codes, as well as the lines of command 
and service units, of the members of the law enforcement authorities who had participated in 
apparently irregular military operations. One of the arguments based on which the Ministry of 
Defence had refused to disclose the information was that, if it did, it would be recognizing the 
officers’ responsibility regarding the irregularities. However, the court ordered the Ministry to 
disclose the information stating that, if it considered it necessary, it could “expressly clarify (…) 
that the disclosure of said information does not imply any suspicion, indication or recognition 
regarding the involvement of such public servants in criminal activities. ”43 
In 2010, the Constitutional Court of Colombia expanded its jurisprudence on security information 
and reiterated its position. In a similar case, it determined that the refusal of the National Police 
to provide information on the identity of the agents who had been on duty in the area where the 
forced disappearance of a person occurred, infringed the petitioners’ right of access to information. 
In the opinion of the highest court, the possibility that the disclosure of this information would 
jeopardize the personal safety of police officers was minimal as they were persons residing in 
Bogotá and not in an area with public order problems. Therefore, it ordered the disclosure of 
information as the right of access to public information “has become an essential tool for the 
satisfaction of the right to the truth of the victims of arbitrary actions and human rights violations, 
and for guaranteeing the right of society to the historical memory. ”44
Additionally, the Constitutional Court of Colombia declared unconstitutional a rule that sought to 
create a generic reserved-related category on all the information related to defence and national 
security matters. For the court, “this kind of generic or vague expressions constitutes a general 
authorization for the authorities to keep secret such information as they deem appropriate at their 
discretion, and is clearly contrary to Article 74 of the Political Constitution as it implies a denial 
of the right of access and prevents citizen’s control over the actions of public servants and State 
agencies. ”45 
In Chile, both judges and the body guaranteeing the right of access to public information have 
ordered the armed forces to disclose information in their possession. In 2017, the Court of Appeal 
of Santiago had to analyse whether information on the expenditures and suppliers of dissuasive 
elements, tear gas bombs, and rubber shots used by the State during demonstrations could not 
be disclosed, under the protection of the national security exemption.46 Carabineros de Chile 
had refused to disclose the information arguing that it would jeopardize the performance of its 
duties in relation to national security. In the opinion of the court, stating that the information was 
related to national security was not enough, since it should be proved that the publication of the 
information causes specific and determinable damage to constitutional interests. Given that the 
State had not argued properly and had only stated that “the release of the requested information 
43 Colombia. Constitutional Court T-1025-2007. Judgment of December 3, 2007.
44 Colombia. Constitutional Court T-511-2010. Judgment of June 18, 2010.
45 Colombia. Constitutional Court C-274-2013. Judgment of May 9, 2013.
46 Chile. Court of Appeal of Santiago. File No. 618-2017. Judgment of July 13, 2017.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...18
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
would damage or harm the due performance of their duties by Carabineros, without mentioning 
any precedent that proved so, ” the court ordered the provision of the information.
In 2020, the Council for Transparency of Chile cited the above precedent in a case in which it was 
also discussed whether the information related to the handling of social demonstrations was 
reserved. Specifically, it ordered Carabineros de Chile to provide information on the number of 
bombs or tear gases purchased and used in the last five years, evidencing that the State did not 
satisfactorily exhaust the harm test. For the Council for Transparency of Chile, “to argue that the 
disclosure of information on the number of bombs and tear gases purchased and used, would affect 
or jeopardize the security of the nation is implausible, as the agency has not granted sufficient 
background that would imply a present or potential impact on the legal assets to be protected. ”47 
The Court of Appeal of Santiago has promoted transparency in the functioning of other defence 
and security entities, beyond Carabineros de Chile. In 2021, it ordered the release of the report 
sheet and resume of the former Commander-in-Chief of the Chilean Navy. The court stated that 
former public servants’ resumes are public as they are held by public authorities and are prepared 
with public budgets. Such disclosure does not change when it comes to armed forces’ officials. In 
addition, in the opinion of the court, “the Chilean Navy only invoked generic allegations on the 
matter and failed to acknowledge how —specifically— the disclosure of the requested data could 
affect the legal assets under caution. ”48 
Access to information produced by the armed forces has also been addressed by the judiciary and 
the bodies guaranteeing access to information in Guatemala and Argentina. In Guatemala, the 
Constitutional Court established that the documents on military operations carried out during the 
military dictatorship of Efraín Ríos Montt are not covered by the national security exemption.49 
The court considered that the State failed to prove that these documents had the status of 
national security, which made it imperative to guarantee public access to them. On the other 
hand, in 2021, the Agency for Access to Public Information of Argentina had to resolve whether 
the information produced by the Ministry of Defence 50 years ago was exempt from disclosure 
because it was protected by the national security reserve. For the Agency, exceptions regarding 
access to information should have a limited —and reasonable— duration (usually, 10 or 15 years, 
but may be up to 30 years.) For this reason, the Agency found “unreasonable that the legally bound 
subject should continue to invoke an exemption without properly demonstrating what causes 
exist as of this date for that situation to persist after more than 50 years since its creation. ”50 Based 
on this argument, the Agency granted the Ministry of Defence 10 days to deliver the requested 
information, while the burden of proof falls on the State. The Ministry of Defence finally delivered 
the requested information.
In 2019, the Supreme Court of Justice of Argentina had to decide on a case similar to the one 
that was resolved by the oversight body of the country. The petitioner had requested access to 
the decrees issued between 1976 and 1983 by those who served as de facto presidents under 
Argentina’s last military dictatorship. The disclosure of the information had been refused on the 
grounds that it was classified as “secret” and “reserved. ” Finally, the Court determined that the 
State’s was incurring in an illegitimate conduct when generically preventing access to decrees 
which, according to the petitioner, were related to the right to the truth concerning human rights 
47 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C1341-2020. July 7, 2020.
48 Chile. Court of Appeal of Santiago. File No. 576-2021. Judgment of March 11, 2022.
49 Guatemala. Constitutional Court. File No. 2290-2007. Judgment of March 5, 2008.
50 Argentina. Agency for Access to Public Information. Resolution No. 249-2021 of December 3, 2021.19
violations committed in those years.51 Mexico’s INAI also ordered the Secretariat of Defence to 
provide information on the anti-migration operations that have been carried out from 2018 to 
December 2021 in the south of the country, the number of operations carried out per month, and 
the number of migrants rescued in each operation.52 
9. Decisions on State Budget Information
Through their decisions, the judiciary and the oversight bodies have guaranteed access to 
public information related to the State budget and the allocation of public funds. In Peru, the 
Constitutional Court established, even before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled on 
Claude Reyes, that the right of access to information obliges the State to provide information on 
the expenses and work schedules of public servants.53 In Argentina, the Supreme Court of Justice 
has approached the issue from a different perspective. In 2012 it had to decide if the financial 
resources invested in advertising by a non-State public body should be disclosed to petitiones.54 
In the opinion of the court, the National Institute of Social Services for Retired and Pensioners of 
Argentina had to disclose the information under the principle of maximum disclosure, which also 
covers entities that provide services of public interest and exercise duties delegated by the State.
A few years later, in 2015, the Federal Contentious-Administrative Chamber of Argentina 
condemned the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights for refusing to provide information on the 
budget and salaries of staff working on a territorial development programme, based on the fact 
that the petitioner had no legitimate interest in it.55 After analysing the inter-American standards 
and the national jurisprudence, the court ordered the Ministry of Justice to release the requested 
budget information. On the same year, this court reached the same determination in a similar case. 
Some civil society organizations had requested information on the employees, payroll, and budget 
allocations of the House of Representatives of the Nation. After the State refused to provide 
part of the information, the Federal Contentious-Administrative Chamber ordered to fully comply 
with the requests for information, reiterating the standards of the inter-American human rights 
system.56 That year, the Argentine closing court ruled on another case regarding access to public 
information related to the State’s coffers. The Supreme Court of the Nation ordered a majority 
state-owned company to provide a copy of the investment project signed with a foreign company 
whose object was the joint exploitation of hydrocarbons on Argentine soil.57 The court considered 
that the company was a legally bound subject regarding the right of access to public information 
as the executive power had a majority stake in the capital and in corporate decisions. Moreover, it 
considered that the sole claim that disclosing the information would endanger trade secrets was 
not sufficient, and therefore it determined that “mandated bodies by the Law can only reject an 
information request if they present, describe and demonstrate in detail the elements and reasons 
why the release of the information is likely to cause damage to the legitimately protected purpose. ”
In Brazil, the Superior Court of Justice has also strengthened, through its decisions, the budgetary 
transparency of the State. In 2012, it ordered the Ministry of the Secretariat of Social Communication 
51 Argentina. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation. File CSJ 315-2013. Judgment of May 7, 2019.
52 Mexico. INAI. RRA 11825-2021. Resolution of November 10, 2021.
53 Peru. Constitutional Court. File No. 0959-2004. Judgment of November 19, 2004.
54 Argentina. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation. A917. XLVI. Judgment of December 4, 2012.
55 Argentina. Federal Contentious-Administrative Chamber. File No. 39019-2014. Judgment of February 20, 2015.
56 Argentina. Federal Contentious-Administrative Chamber. File No. 2445-2015. Judgment of September 29, 2015.
57 Argentina. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation 37747-2015. Judgment of November 10, 2015.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...20
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
of the Presidency of the Republic to provide information on official spending on advertising in the 
first decade of the 21st century. The court considers that this information entails an obvious public 
interest, which prevails over the potential reservations and exceptions alleged by the Presidency.58
The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of El Salvador has not fallen behind. In 2014, it 
determined that the Legislative Assembly had violated a petitioner’s right of access to information 
by not providing said petitioner with a copy of the authorizations for the purchase of works of art, 
Christmas gifts, and alcoholic beverages for 2012; not providing said petitioner with a list of the 
goods purchased together with the corresponding invoices; and not informing on the origin of the 
funds to purchase those goods.59 Additionally, in a 201760 decision that highlights the importance 
for judges to ensure compliance with their judgments in defence of the access to information, the 
Constitutional Chamber found that the President’s Office had only partially complied with the 
provision of information on the President’s travels abroad and expenditures on protocol activities, 
ordered in a previous decision.61 Thus, it reiterated that the President’s Office should deliver the 
requested information and inform the court once it had done so.
10. Decisions on Public Servants’ Information
The right of access to public information is constantly colliding with the rights to privacy and 
the protection of personal data of public servants. It is essential to adequately weigh the public 
interest associated with the disclosure of information and the damage it could cause to these 
rights. The proper interpretation and weighting between both legitimate interests has led judges 
and bodies guaranteeing access to information in various countries to provide information on 
wages, background, and names of public servants. In Argentina, the Federal Administration of 
Public Revenues refused to disclose the labour and administrative records of one of its officials. In 
response to this refusal, the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation had to resolve on one of the 
most common questions in these cases: if the information was reserved only because it contained 
personal data. In the opinion of the court, the disclosure of the information, as long as it does not 
include sensitive data, “does not violate the right to privacy nor affect [the] honour” of the person; 
the requested information should be therefore granted.62 
In Chile, the Council for Transparency ordered the disclosure of the names and academic degrees 
of professors hired by the departments of economics, law, and engineering of Chilean universities 
in 2021. The oversight body considered that “the information requested entails a clear public 
interest as it relates to important processes in higher education, such as the accreditation process, 
and consequently, the application process for a free university education. ”63 The decision adopted 
by the Council for Transparency of Chile refers both to public and private universities as they carry 
out a public service: education. In another recent resolution, the Council for Transparency of Chile 
ordered the Office of the Under-Secretary of Public Health to inform the petitioner on the names 
58 Brazil. High Court of Justice. Special Resource No. 1198727 – MG (2011/0116267-9). Judgment of August 14, 
2012.
59 El Salvador. Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice. Amparo 155-2013. Judgment of July 25, 
2014.
60 El Salvador. Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice. Amparo 713-2015. Judgment of October 23, 
2017.
61 El Salvador. Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice. Amparo 713-2015. Judgment of September 
1, 2016.
62 Argentina. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation 591-2014. Judgment of June 21, 2016.
63 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C6805-2021. December 21, 2021.21
of the attendees to the working meetings of the “COVID Committee”, an advisory body informally 
created to advise the central government on epidemiological policy decision-making. The Council 
considered that there is a clear public interest in making transparent the reasons that have caused 
the adoption of sanitary measures and the “work carried out by inter-ministerial technical advisory 
bodies such as the one consulted, its members and the agreements adopted. ”64
In different countries, the judiciary has repeatedly guaranteed that public servants’ salary is public 
information that should be disclosed to the public. In Guatemala, the Constitutional Court ruled on 
a lawsuit against the article of the transparency law that establishes that wages, travel allowances, 
and fees paid to public servants were pro-active public information. In the plaintiff’s opinion, this 
information should not be public because public servants’ right to privacy would be violated. 
Instead, the court considered that this type of information is of “public interest due to its origin, 
which is the national Treasury, generated from the tax burden borne by citizens for the financial 
sustainability of the State. ”65
A similar conclusion was reached by the Constitutional Court of the Dominican Republic. In 
2012, it considered that the names and salaries of public servants constitute public information 
people should have access to. To think otherwise “would deprive citizens of a mechanism which 
is essential for the control of corruption in the public administration. ”66 The Supreme Court of 
Justice of Paraguay has also established that citizens have the right to know public servants’ 
salaries as their reservation does not outweigh the proportionality test established by the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights in Claude Reyes regarding limitations on the access to public 
information.67 In Brazil, the Federal Supreme Court determined that the gross remuneration and 
position of public servants is public information that can be disclosed without affecting personal 
privacy.68 These data are directly related to the public service and also make it possible to execute 
the principle of administrative disclosure.
In Chile, the Council for Transparency recently established that the payslips of public servants, 
as well as their duties, are of a public nature, and thus, mandated bodies by the Law cannot 
rely on reservation causes in order not to provide the information.69 Following a similar line of 
thinking, in Mexico, INAI requested the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic to report on 
the complaints received against the person who at the time was the Under-Secretary of Health 
Prevention and Promotion of the Mexican Ministry of Health.70 For the oversight body, information 
related to investigations and complaints by public servants should be disclosed to the public. 
Additionally, it established that the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) should 
provide whoever may request it, information on accusations and complaints regarding sexual 
harassment, sexual abuse, or sexual assault against one of its professors.71 
64 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C4101-2021. August 31, 2021.
65 Guatemala. Constitutional Court 1373, 1412, and 1413-2009.
66 Dominican Republic. Constitutional Court. Judgment TC 0042-2012 of September 21, 2012.
67 Paraguay. Supreme Court of Justice. File No. 280-2018. Judgment No. 30 of June 7, 2018.
68 Brazil. Federal Supreme Court. Suspensão de segurança 3902-2011 of June 9, 2011.
69 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C6886-2021 of December 21, 2021.
70 Mexico. INAI. RRA 7645-2022. Resolution of August 17, 2022.
71 Mexico. INAI. RRA 4790-2022. Resolution of June 1, 2022.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...22
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
11. Decisions on Information Related to the Implementationof Public 
Policies
The right of access to public information has also served to make the implementation and 
management of public policies more transparent, strengthening democracy, increasing State 
effectiveness and efficiency, and preventing corruption. The judicial branch and the oversight 
bodies in different countries have understood this. In Colombia, the Constitutional Court had to 
decide if the Administrative Unit for the Integral Care and Reparation of Victims had violated a 
mother’s right of access to information by refusing to provide her with the reasons why her son 
was not recognized as a victim of the armed conflict.72 In the opinion of the court, the State had 
no reason to deny such information, since its disclosure was essential to know how public policy 
works and, moreover, the mother had the right to know said information.
In Argentina, the Supreme Court of the Nation determined that the citizens have the right to know 
who the beneficiaries of the State social aid are. In this case, the Centre for the Implementation of 
Public Policies for Equity and Development had requested access to the list of beneficiaries held 
by the Ministry of Social Development.73 The court found that the information should be provided 
because it was not sensitive information, and its disclosure had a positive impact on the political 
control over the execution of public resources. Following the previous precedent, the Agency for 
Access to Public Information of Argentina demanded the provision of the list of natural and legal 
persons who had been benefited by the refund system established for exports carried out in 
certain ports, based on the fact that expectation of privacy was lower in the case of assets data 
that justify a tax benefit.74 
The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Costa Rica has also recognized the intrinsic 
relationship between access to public information and citizen control over public policies. In 2017, 
it had to resolve on the refusal of the State to provide information related to concessions made by 
the State in the Santa Cruz Maritime-Terrestrial Zone. The court found that the refusal to disclose 
the information had violated the petitioner’s right of access to information; the information was 
public and of interest to the citizens.75 In Uruguay, the Court of Appeal ordered the release of 
information related to the public policy on education.76 Specifically, it urged the National Public 
Education Administration to provide information on the number of enrolled, withdrawn, promoted 
and failing students at each national educational institution in 2011 and 2012. In Chile, the 
Council for Transparency ordered the Municipality of Yungay to release information on its public 
policy on street harassment, the environment, social programmes during the health emergency, 
and sports policies, among others.77 
The Constitutional Court of Ecuador has also ruled on the implementation of social public policies 
at the national level.78 In a case in which information was requested on disability cards issued 
by the Ministry of Health, the Court ordered the Ministry to provide complete information on 
the authorities involved in the disability qualification process, the cards issued disaggregated 
72 Colombia. Constitutional Court T-608-2013. Judgment of September 2, 2013.
73 Argentina. Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation. C. 830. XLVI. Judgment of March 26, 2014.
74 Argentina. Agency for Access to Public Information. Resolution No. 72-2019 of May 9, 2019.
75 Costa Rica. Constitutional Chamber. Resolution No. 10085-2017. Judgment of June 30, 2017.
76 Uruguay. Court of Appeals. Judgment of November 6, 2013. EF 0003-000204/2013.
77 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C5716-2021 of December 21, 2021.
78 Ecuador. Constitutional Court. Judgment No. 11-21-IS-2021 of September 8, 2021.23
by qualifying unit and delivery date, the comprehensive assessment carried out in each case, 
and the cards issued during the health emergency. This information should serve the Office of 
the Ombudsman to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of health and social protection public 
policies.
12.  Decisions on Information Related to COVID-19
The judiciary and the bodies guaranteeing access to public information have spoken out about 
public transparency in emergency situations such as the one caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
In April 2021, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights issued a resolution in which it 
recalled the standards of transparency that States should meet in reference to information related 
to COVID-19 vaccines79. It stated, for example, that “States must proactively release information 
on vaccination records, studies, and plans, and generally provide information on the procurement, 
import, distribution, prioritization, and administering of vaccines. ”
In line with the determination of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the Council 
for Transparency of Chile supported the right of access to information of a person who requested 
copies of the contracts signed by the State to purchase vaccines. The Council determined that the 
information requested is of public interest, since it facilitates the social control of the national 
vaccination programme and strengthens the confidence in the process. Therefore, it ordered to 
provide “a copy of the contracts signed by the Ministry of Health, as of the date of the request, 
with national or international pharmaceutical companies for the purchase of COVID-19 vaccines, 
keeping in reserve the information related to the cost structure and the logistics or distribution 
of the product in question. ”80 This oversight body was consistent in its decision and reiterated 
that standard in multiple resolutions.81 The Court of Appeal of Santiago ratified the Council for 
Transparency of Chile’s decision in December 2021. The court considered that the confidentiality 
clauses that the State had agreed on with the pharmaceutical companies did not comply with 
constitutional and legal regulations. It also shared that the partial disclosure of the agreements 
“strengthens citizens’ confidence in the vaccination process, thus encouraging greater voluntary 
participation in the national vaccination plan, in the benefit and interest of the whole population. ”82 
The Argentine case is similar. The Agency for Access to Public Information ordered the Ministry 
of Health to provide the petitioner with a copy of the agreement signed between the Argentine 
Republic and the Russian Federation for the arrival of the Sputnik V vaccine in the country. In 
analysing the Ministry’s argument that the State had signed confidentiality clauses that prevented 
disclosure, the Agency determined that “the answer provided by the legally bound subject, that not 
only understood that the entire agreement was confidential, but also did not explain the content 
of those clauses, is not a good practice in terms of access to information. ”83 
The Administrative Court of Cundinamarca in Colombia arrived at a similar conclusion regarding 
specifically the disclosure of confidentiality clauses.84 In its judgment, the Court cited the Argentine 
79 IACHR. Resolution No. 1/2021.
80 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C585-2021. June 22, 2021
81 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decisions No. C1049-21, C1863-21, C2104-21, C2977-21, C3810-21, 
and C5814-21.
82 Chile. Court of Appeal of Santiago 375-2021. Judgment of May 12, 2022.
83 Argentina. Agency for Access to Public Information. Resolution No. 29-2021 of March 29, 2021.
84 Colombia. Administrative Court of Cundinamarca. Judgment No. 2021-9-178 RI of September 30, 2021.CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...24
CI Discussion papers - 22 Synthesis of Decisions on Access to Public Information...
case mentioned above. This decision originated in a request by a group of citizens concerning 
confidentiality clauses in vaccine purchase contracts. The competent public authorities refused to 
disclose the information on the grounds that the confidentiality clauses imposed the non disclosure 
of the entire contract, and since the clauses were part of the contract, they too were reserved. 
The court considered that “it was a kind of ad ignorantiam and petitio principii fallacy”, while the 
State’s argument was circular. The court also analysed the possible impact that the disclosure of 
the contracts may have on the vaccination policy and found that “empirical evidence shows that 
the disclosure of information on the purchase of vaccines has not had negative impacts; on the 
contrary, it allows for best practices, informed controls, and opinions, increasing confidence and 
transparency. Even to get people to overcome vaccine resistance, both information awareness and 
the intervention of different sectors of the society are important. ” For that reason, it ordered the 
disclosure of the information to the petitioners.
In Ecuador, the Constitutional Court ordered the Ministry of Public Health to provide the Office of 
the Ombudsman with information on the number of COVID-19 vaccines received in “phase 0”, the 
list of individuals vaccinated in that phase, and the vaccination protocol used at the time. The Court 
established that information on the number of vaccines purchased “does not fall within the sphere 
of what could be considered as confidential information, nor could it be considered confidential 
because it does not in any way affect national security. ”85 Similarly, the Council for Transparency 
of Chile ordered the Office of the Under-Secretary of Public Health to provide data on confirmed 
COVID-19 cases between March 2020 and September 2021 discriminated by location and age.86 
It is worth highlighting two more cases resolved by the oversight bodies in Argentina and Mexico. 
In July 2020, the Agency for Access to Public Information of Argentina established that documents 
related to procurement during the health emergency (which in many countries followed abbreviated 
procedures) were not exempt from social accountability as citizens could have access to them. For 
this oversight body, “the public interest of the community in access to information related to the 
processing of public procurement by the State is clear, particularly in the case of exceptional and 
simplified selection processes carried out in the context of the current health emergency. ”87 
The National Institute of Transparency, Access to Public Information and Protection of Personal Data 
(INAI) of Mexico determined that citizens had the right to receive reliable and truthful information 
from the State, especially regarding public health. After a public servant of the Secretary of Health 
claimed that there is no scientific evidence to support that face masks have the ability to prevent 
the spread of COVID-19, a citizen asked the public entity for the public documents and scientific 
research that would support said statement.88 Following the incomplete answer by the Ministry 
of Health, the INAI ordered the legally bound subject to properly seek the information requested 
and to provide the citizens with quality information to support the statements of public servants 
in the exercise of their duties. In another resolution, the INAI established that information on 
the number of vaccines that Mexico had donated to other countries could not be considered as 
reserved neither for national security reasons nor on the grounds of international negotiations. As 
a result, it ordered the legally bound subject to guarantee access to said information.89 
85 Ecuador. Constitutional Court. Judgment TC 29-2021 of December 1, 2012.
86 Chile. Council for Transparency. Protection Decision No. C7283-21. Resolution of December 21, 2021.
87 Argentina. Agency for Access to Public Information. Resolution No. 161-2020 of July 1, 2020.
88 Mexico. INAI. RRA 359-2021. Resolution of April 13, 2021.
89 Mexico. INAI. RRA 359-2022. Resolution of March 9, 2022.25
Daniel Ospina Celis is a lawyer and holds a master’s degree 
in History from the Los Andes University. He is a researcher 
at Dejusticia, a law, justice, and social studies centre.
.
Catalina Botero Marino is the Director of the UNESCO Chair 
in Freedom of Expression at the Los Andes University; 
Co-Chair of Facebook and Instagram Oversight Board; 
and a leading expert of the Columbia Global Freedom of 
Expression Project at the University of Columbia (NYC).
She was Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of 
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR)/
OAS; dean of the School of Law of the Los Andes University; 
and a judge in charge and co-judge of the Constitutional 
Court and the Council of State of Colombia.About the Authors
UNESCO Montevideo Office
Communication and Information Sector
Luis Piera 1992, Piso 2 | Montevideo 11200, Uruguay
www.unesco.org/montevideo
montevideo@unesco.org | tel. (598) 2413 2075Communication and Information Discussion Papers, available at: unesdoc.unesco.org
#1. Gasto público en la educación de América Latina. ¿Puede servir a los propósitos de la Declaración de París sobre los Recursos 
Educativos Abiertos? Amalia Toledo, Carolina Botero y Luisa Guzmán (Also available in English)
#2. La información y el conocimiento abierto en el contexto de la cooperación multilateral: Aspectos clave para la revisión del Acuerdo 
Regional No.7 de ALADI - Juan Carlos Lara y Carolina Rossini
#3. Principios y “buenas prácticas” para los medios públicos en América Latina. Martín Becerra y Silvio Waisbord. 
#4 Guía político- pedagógica sobre la incorporación de la temática de libertad de expresión y de acceso a la información pública en la 
formación de operadores judiciales en América Latina. Catalina Botero.
#5 Regulación independiente de la radio y teledifusión: Una revisión de políticas y prácticas internacionales. Eve Salomon. (Also available 
in English and Portuguese)
# 6 Internet y la libertad de expresión. Andrew Puddephatt. (Also available in English and Portuguese)
# 7 Concentración de medios y libertad de expresión: normas globales y consecuencias para las Américas. Toby Mendel, Ángel García 
Castillejo y Gustavo Gómez. (Also available in English). 
# 8 Acceso a la información: Lecciones de la América Latina. Bill Orme. (Also available in English and Portuguese)
# 9 Guía para operadores judiciales sobre la Agenda 2030 para el desarrollo sostenible con énfasis en el ODS 16. Javier Benech
# 10 Mejores prácticas para orientar el diálogo entre el Poder Judical y la prensa. Guía para jueces y periodistas.
# 11  La seguridad de los periodistas en las agendas de derechos humanos y desarrollo sostenible: oportunidades para mejorar los 
mecanismos de reporte sobre violaciones de derechos humanos en Guatemala, Honduras y El Salvador. Oscar Antonio Pérez y Luis 
Enrique Salazar (Also available in English)
# 12 Manual de periodismo de investigación. Ética / Narrativa / Investigación / Seguridad. Mauricio Weibel Barbosa
# 13  La convergencia de medios, telecomunicaciones e internet en la perspectiva de la competencia: Hacia un enfoque multicomprensivo. 
Martín Becerra y Guillermo Mastrini
# 14 Redes sociales y elecciones. Andrew Puddephatt (Also available in English)
# 15 Foro de Alto Nivel: Fortalecimiento del Estado de Derecho y los Derechos Humanos para lograr sociedades pacíficas, justas, inclusivas y 
transparentes. Javier Benech. 
# 16 Infancia, democracia y libertad de expresión. Emilio García Méndez. (Also available in English)
# 17  Desafíos y asimetrias regulatorias de los servicios audiovisuales en Internet ¿Qué hacer? OBSERVACOM
# 18 Manual de periodismo de tecnología. Investigación| Escritura | T emas | Seguridad Natalia Zuazo
# 19  Niños, niñas y el uso de internet en São Paulo y Buenos Aires: estudios a partir de una perspectiva de igualdad de género 
# 20  Acceso abierto en instituciones de educación superior en América Latina - Julio Gaitán Bohórquez y María Juliana Soto Narváez
# 21  La lapicera y la cámara no son enemigos; los uniformes tampoco - Eduardo Bertoni. (Also available in English)