Global T oolkit for 
Law Enforcement 
Agents
Freedom of Expression, Access to  
Information and Safety of JournalistsPublished in 2022 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France © UNESCO 2022
ISBN  978-92-3-100559-6
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license (http:/ /creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/ ). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access 
Repository (http:/ /www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en ). 
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries. 
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the 
Organization.
Authors  
 Lead author: Jem Thomas  
(Director of Training and Research, Albany Associates)  
Contributing authors: Anna Averkiou, Terri Judd, Sarah Kelly  
(Consultants – Albany Associates)
This toolkit includes components from UNESCO’s T raining Manual: 
Freedom of expression and Public Order authored by Paul Daudin 
Clavaud, journalist and expert in media and communications; T oby 
Mendel, Executive Director of Centre for Law and Democracy;  
and Ian Lafrenière, Member of the National Assembly of Quebec, 
Formerly Director of Corporate Communications, City of Montreal 
Police Service, Canada.
Project coordination  
Mehdi Benchelah, Senior Project Officer, Section for Freedom of 
Expression and Safety of Journalists, Communication and Information 
Sector, UNESCO
Samrita Menon, Associate Project Officer, Section for Freedom of 
Expression and Safety of Journalists, Communication and Information 
Sector, UNESCOCover photo  
Dreamstime  
Official USS Theodore Roosevelt (CVN 71) Page (CC BY 2.0)  
Agência Senado (CC BY 2.0)
Images in this publication do not fall under the CC-BY-SA licence and 
may not be used or reproduced without the prior permission of the 
copyright holders.
Graphic design  
M&T&Co 
Cover design  
Klawe Rzeczy 
Printed by  
UNESCO
Printed in France
This publication was supported by the Netherlands through the 
International Programme for the Development of Communication 
(IPDC) and the Multi-Donor Programme (MDP) on Freedom of 
Expression and Safety of Journalists.Short Summary
Fostering Freedom of Expression and Public Order: T ools for an improved relationship 
between Law Enforcement Agents, the media and the public.
Law enforcement agencies are often faced with many challenges to balance the 
right to freedom of expression with the imperative to maintain public order. During 
turbulent times, they have had to manage public safety issues around elections, 
natural disasters and public health emergencies, and facilitate respect for freedom 
of expression and the right to peaceful assembly. Political, social and economic 
circumstances have increasingly encouraged unrest amongst the public, placing 
officers in often difficult situations.
Against this backdrop, journalists and their freedoms 
are increasingly threatened. Over the last 12 years, 
1,088 journalists have been killed for their work or 
while on the job. In the first half of 2022 alone,  
45 media professionals have been killed.  
In response, governments and law enforcement 
agencies have had to examine their ways of dealing 
with public order issues, working with journalists and 
communicating effectively with the public.
Through the seven modules in this toolkit, officers and trainers can better 
appreciate how to equitably balance their public safety and order duties while 
enabling freedom of expression, and its associated freedoms, through better 
communications, provision of information, supporting the legal process, and 
enabling journalists to work safely.86%
of cases of killings 
of journalists remain 
unresolved
Since wars begin in the minds of men, 
it is in the minds of men that the 
defences of peace must be constructed”
| 3
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | IntroductionForeword
Law enforcement agents (LEAs) are on the frontline of maintaining public order and 
safety of all citizens by protecting and operating under the umbrella of the rule of law. 
In the performance of their duties, LEAs must guarantee respect for, and protection 
of fundamental human rights as enshrined in international legal standards. Among 
these is the right to freedom of expression, which constitutes not only a self-standing 
right, but also a crucial enabling freedom that serves to realise the right to assembly, 
to elect political representatives, and to hold opinions and share them with others. 
Journalists play an essential role in providing information to the public, and too often, 
they are targeted for revealing corruption, human rights violations, trafficking, and 
political wrongdoing. Alarmingly, impunity for killings of journalists continues to prevail 
worldwide: in the past decade, a journalist has been killed on average every four days, 
and only 14 percent of these cases have been judicially resolved since 2006. 
Besides being their legal obligation, it is also in the interest of LEAs to safeguard 
freedom of expression, and to develop professional relations with journalists. By 
protecting freedom of expression and its corollaries, press freedom and access to 
information, law enforcement officials facilitate openness, transparency and 
accountability in their societies. Ultimately, this leads to greater public trust in state 
institutions including law enforcement agencies. 
However, the current reality is that relations between LEAs and media professionals 
are challenging, and often confrontational, especially during tense public events 
such as elections and demonstrations. This is notably demonstrated by UNESCO 
data which has recorded attacks against journalists in connection with the coverage 
of protests, demonstrations, and riots in at least 60 countries around the world. In the 
first half of 2021 alone, many of these attacks were often committed by police and 
security forces.
Even in consolidated democracies, police and law enforcement officials often lack 
adequate knowledge and tools, to effectively communicate with the media, and to 
investigate attacks and crimes against freedom of expression. With the rapid 
advancement of digital technologies – such as Artificial Intelligence, Facial 
Recognition T echnology and surveillance tools – the balancing of public order duties 
and ensuring respect for the right to privacy and free expression, becomes even 
more challenging. 
4 |
Introduction  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsIt is in this context that this Global T oolkit for Law Enforcement Actors on 
Freedom of Expression, Safety of Journalists and Access to Information was 
developed. It builds on UNESCO’s Training Manual on Freedom of Expression 
and Public Order , to provide an updated set of international and regional legal 
references, case studies, good practices and recommendations from around 
the world, especially in the context of changing digital technologies, to enhance 
the protection of fundamental human rights. 
This initiative builds on UNESCO’s efforts to raise the capacities of LEAs and 
security forces globally, which have since 2013, trained over 11,500 law 
enforcement officials from 150 countries on freedom of expression and safety of 
journalists. Such capacity-building activities are implemented within the framework 
of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity , 
which aims to create a free and safe environment for journalists and media workers, 
with a view to strengthening peace, democracy, human rights and development 
worldwide.
We hope that this T oolkit serves as a useful instrument for law enforcement officials 
and police training institutions worldwide to foster freedom of expression and its 
associated rights, in their respective line of duty. 
T awfik Jelassi 
UNESCO Assistant Director-General  
for Communication and Information
| 5
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | IntroductionThis publication was supported by:
6 |
Introduction  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsOverview
As codified in universal declarations and international standards, freedom of 
expression is an essential aspect of the rule of law and ensures accountability in 
government. As such, it is a central component of democratic governance to be 
protected by any state’s law enforcement agencies.
With that in mind, the primary target audience of this manual are officers of Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) or “law enforcement officials” 1  and their trainers. 
Journalists, lawmakers and other actors may find it of interest even though they 
are not the primary target audience. The manual recognises the complex 
environment in which officers operate and the difficulties of balancing their 
obligations to protect rights to freedom of expression as well as maintain public 
order. It also attempts to approach peripheral but connected law enforcement 
issues outside the direct realm of public order but nonetheless necessary for 
freedom of expression. Further, it examines the contemporary digital and 
information landscape in light of many changes in the last few years.
The toolkit presents international and regional standards on freedom of expression, 
its (rare) legitimate limits and the way it applies concretely in the work of LEA. 
Further, it recognises that policing structures vary across the world, as do the 
political, social and cultural environments within which these structures operate. 
As such, it is not intended as a ‘one-size-fits-all’ document. Rather, it aims to provide 
generic practical principles based upon internationally accepted standards, 
developed by the international community and ratified by almost all Nations.
Developed through extensive desk research and interviews with police officers, 
security experts, journalists and academics, the authors have also brought 
decades of experience in training LEAs worldwide to this manual. This manual 
may be read and used in conjunction with UNESCO’s ‘Global T oolkit for Judicial 
Actors: International legal standards on freedom of expression, access to 
information and safety of journalists.’ It is recognised that this manual and the 
training it advocates, will only go so far in tackling some of the issues described 
within. Senior leadership, policymakers and judicial actors will have a significant 
part to play. However, should they play their part, this toolkit will enable LEA officers 
to do so as well.
For trainers, the toolkit also suggests points of discussion and case studies and 
offers training activities to enable effective learning of the key elements. It also 
covers training guidelines to assist trainers in using the material to best effect with 
their trainees and proposed training schedules.
Overleaf is a summary of the modules contained herein.
1  The terms law enforcement actors/agencies (LEAs), law enforcement officials, police and security forces are used interchangeably throughout this manual. For 
further explanation, see Article 1, Commentary points (a) and (b) of United Nations OHCHR’s ‘ Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials ’, adopted by General 
Assembly resolution 34/169 of 17 December 1979
| 7
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | IntroductionModule 1  11
Democracy, the Law and Freedom of Expression
This module outlines the international legal framework underpinning the right to freedom of expression, 
its key characteristics and the state obligations to protect this right, notably through the Rule of Law. 
But it also underlines where the legitimate limits of this right lie. It aims to enable officers to critically and 
pragmatically understand the parameters which underpin principles relating to their role in this regard. 
Further, this module looks at contemporary issues, such as the Covid-19 pandemic, disinformation 
and rapidly advancing digital technologies, which are impacting the fine balance between public order 
and fundamental rights.
Module 2  51
The Media, its Freedom and Safety of Journalists
This module enables officers to understand the nature of journalism as a prime driver of the media. 
Yet, as is shown, journalists are increasingly far from free to serve the public interest but are rather 
threatened, from several quarters, in this pursuit, both online and offline. Their safety is often 
compromised and they find themselves in harm’s way, not least, but not exclusively, in public order 
situations. Women journalists are especially prone to such dangers. While identifying specific threat 
mechanisms, the practical matters of LEAs preventing such harm and the need, in certain cases, to 
protect journalists are raised.
Module 3 75
Communicating with the Media and Public
The modern communication environment enables LEAs to communicate not only with the media 
but directly with the public. Done well, this can provide benefits not only for LEAs but also facilitates 
journalism and promotes effective engagement with those they are tasked to protect; the public. 
This module looks at mechanisms through which LEAs can improve their public communications 
and provide necessary information to the media. It seeks to promote the need to develop 
working relationships with the media for their mutual benefit and highlights the skills required of 
communications officers.
Module 4  105
Communication and Facilitating Coverage  
in Public Safety Crises
In situations of conflict, terrorism, disaster, major incidents, or severe public disorder, where public 
safety is a primary concern and public order is threatened, the media is often a significant and 
necessary conduit for information for the public. In such situations, emergency powers may be 
invoked, which often by necessity impinge on freedom of expression. Nonetheless, the way LEAs 
establish mechanisms to work with the media in such circumstances is crucial. This module examines 
command and control structures and communication priorities designed to enable effective media 
relations in order to ultimately serve the public in times of duress.
8 |
Introduction  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsModule 5  133
Communicating and Facilitating Coverage  
of Political Events and Elections
The electoral process and the mechanisms of checks and balances (including protests) are central 
to democracy and the rights of public assembly and participation and media freedom are utterly 
necessary to that process. It is necessary to protect those rights while enabling a non-violent public 
environment in which they can be enjoyed. Protests and demonstrations may test LEAs in their abilities 
to balance these two requirements. Equally, violence during elections places strain on the police’s 
obligation to peaceably protect and support the electoral process and its cycle. This module examines 
the principles of neutral, accountable and transparent law enforcement, as well as practices which 
can assist LEAs in facilitating public assembly, participation and elections, including effective media 
coverage and monitoring of the democratic process.
Module 6  157
Enabling the Judicial Process, Investigations  
and their Scrutiny
Public authorities, including LEA and judicial actors act as representatives of the public and are 
obliged to be transparent, via the media or otherwise, and ensure respect for the rights of the public. 
LEAs have a major role in supporting the judiciary by providing the necessary, legally acquired, 
evidence for prosecution. This applies particularly in cases of crimes against journalists, which 
often require specialist investigative techniques. While protecting the public’s right to information, 
agencies are also required to physically protect the rights of those entangled in the justice system. 
These may be whistleblowers, sources, victims, witnesses, or the accused. Or this could be even 
one of their own, who should never be above the law. This module looks at practices enabling LEAs 
to allow access to the courts; deny it where legally justifiable and necessary; understand the limits 
of interrogation and intelligence regarding journalists and their sources; and effectively investigate 
crimes against journalists.
Module 7 179
Access to, Release of and Withholding Information
The modern LEA has the ability and responsibility to provide information for the public good but also 
a remarkable ability to source information for operational reasons. Because today’s agencies have 
such availability of and accessibility to information, this should be used carefully and effectively for the 
public good and restricted only if otherwise. Indeed, access to information is seen as a public right and 
information is crucial in ensuring transparency and accountability. This module addresses the issues 
around information: what should be made available and under what circumstances; what is protected 
data and what is not; where can and cannot journalists have access to obtain information; what and 
why certain material may be seized as evidence and what may not; where should privacy be protected 
and where may it be breached; and the legitimate limits to information-gathering and surveillance 
during public assemblies.
Annex 207
| 9
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | IntroductionList of Acronyms
ACHR American Convention on Human Rights
ACLU  American Civil Liberties Union
ACHPR  African Commission on Human and Peoples Rights
AI Artificial Intelligence
ASEAN  Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BWC Body Worn Camera
CHRI Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative
CoE Council of Europe
CPJ Committee to Protect Journalists
EC  European Commission
ECHR European Convention on Human Rights
ECtHR European Court of Human Rights
FPU Free Press Unlimited
FRA  European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights
FRT  Facial Recognition T echnology
ICCPR  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
ICNL  International Center for Not-for-Profit Law
ICO  Information Commissioner’s Office
ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
IFJ  International Federation of Journalists
IMSI  International Mobile Subscriber Identity
INCLO  International Network of Civil Liberties Organizations
INSI  International News Safety Institute
IPI International Press Institute
LEA  Law Enforcement Actor/Agency
LSE  London School of Economics and Political Science
MIC Media Information Centre
NUJ  National Union of Journalists
OAS  Organization of American States
ODIHR OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
OHCHR Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (UN)
OSCE Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
RSF  Reporters without Borders
SDG(s)  Sustainable Development Goal(s)
SOCMINT  Social Media Intelligence
UN United Nations
UNDP  United Nations Development Programme
UNGA  United Nations General Assembly
UDHR Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UNESCO  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
WQBA Worst Question, Best Answer
10 |
Introduction  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsModule 1:
Democracy, the law and  
freedom of expression
T able of Contents
Key points | 13
1.1 Introduction | 14
1.1.1 Democratic freedoms | 16
1.2  Freedom of Expression: A Fundamental Right, Everywhere | 18
1.3 The Key Characteristics | 20
1.4 The Law, its Institutions and Enforcement | 23
1.5 Limitations and Restrictions | 25
1.6 Civil and Criminal Laws | 29
1.6.1 Civil laws  | 29
1.6.2 Criminal laws | 32
1.7 Current trends | 37
1.7 .1 The impact of COVID-19 | 38
1.7 .2 Disinformation and “fake news” | 40
1.7 .3 Digital technology | 41
1.8 Activities | 48
1.8.1 Activity – Limits and Restrictions | 48
1.8.2 Activity – Doctrinal references | 49
| 11
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1Module aims
 `T o understand the principles of the right to 
free expression and its associated 
freedoms.
 `T o reflect upon the main internationally 
recognised views on freedom of 
expression.
 `T o understand the key characteristics of 
freedom of expression.
 `T o understand the relationship between 
the rule of law and the right to freedom of 
expression.
 `T o understand the internationally 
recognised and accepted limits and 
restrictions to freedom of expression.
 `T o be able to apply, in a basic sense, the 
three-part test for limits and restrictions to 
freedom of expression.
 `T o be aware of current trends in the 
context of law enforcement and freedom 
of expression, notably concerning the 
Covid-19 pandemic, disinformation and 
digital technology.
12 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsKey points
	`International law states that everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference  
and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and 
regardless of frontiers.
	`It is the obligation of the state to guarantee and protect those rights.
	`Limits and restrictions on freedom of expression and other associated rights  
must comply with a three-part test, whereby restrictions must:
 –Be provided for by a law;
 –Pursue a legitimate aim; and 
 –Be deemed necessary, useful, and rationally connected to such  
a legitimate aim pursued in a democratic society.
	`LEAs must be accountable to the law rather than the government of the day.
	`LEAs should be transparent in their activities.
	`Civil and criminal laws, such as those concerning defamation, privacy, hate 
speech, are applied to protect the citizen not the government.
	`The COVID-19 pandemic has seen an erosion of the rights of freedom of 
expression and other associated rights.
	`Freedom of expression and its associated freedoms are valuable tools for 
countering disinformation.
	`Digital technology, such as Artificial Intelligence and social media, have  
significant potential to erode and to expand freedom of expression and its 
associated freedoms. LEAs must be cognisant of the negative and positive 
implications of using such technologies while carrying out their public order  
and security duties. 
| 13
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 11. 1 Introduction
Any open society is constituted by two fundamental elements: freedom of expression and the rule of 
law. In such a society, one cannot exist without the other.
Within a democracy, the State has an obligation to actively communicate with its citizens, either directly 
or through the media. For effective governance, this communication must be two-way, providing 
relevant information and also seeking information, in order to respond adequately, as required. Police 
and security forces (hereafter LEA), as organs of the State, while charged with maintaining public 
order, are not exempt from this requirement.
A central element to enabling this mechanism is freedom of expression and other freedoms closely 
associated with, contributing to and reliant upon it. This module examines, in terms of principles, 
the notion of these freedoms in order to allow LEAs to place them in context with their roles within 
democratic societies. At heart, it encourages the understanding that LEAs have an utterly vital role 
to play in protecting these freedoms. Without safety, security and good public order, these freedoms 
become untenable, depriving citizens and the media of their rights to enjoy these freedoms.
Freedom of expression is central to the defence of all human rights. As noted by the first United Nations 
(UN) General Assembly in 1946: “Freedom of information is a fundamental human right and is the 
touchstone of all the freedoms to which the United Nations is consecrated.” This recognises that it is 
only through knowledge and discussion about those rights that individuals can assert and defend their 
rights, and also that exposure of human rights abuses is key to limiting such abuse. 
Practically, freedom of expression has its own value in enabling the effective State. Good governance, 
public accountability, elections, combating corruption, sound business, financial markets, civil society 
mechanisms – these all depend on the respect for freedom of expression. 
These freedoms are not just fundamental to democratic processes. They also have a social and 
psychological basis. History has shown that societies thrive when their members can communicate 
freely to enable discussion, collaboration and coordination to develop collectively and face challenges. 
As individuals, the psychological drive to communicate and express ourselves is inherent from birth 
and the lack of the ability to do so diminishes our sense of self, degrades our human dignity and 
corrupts our human agency.
The role of LEAs is a complex one. Officers often have to make quick and difficult decisions in delicate, 
even dangerous, situations. The letter of the law provides a standard by which such decisions can and 
should be made but often officers, without immediate recourse to legal texts, have to make judgements 
based upon principles. This module intends to enable such principles, with regards to freedom of 
expression and its related rights, to be better understood by and more readily available to members 
of LEAs.
14 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsSDG 16
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide 
access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions 
at all levels.
T arget 16.3 
Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure equal 
access to justice for all.
T arget 16.10
Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in 
accordance with national legislation and international agreements.
Indicator 16.10.1
Number of verified cases of killing, kidnapping, enforced disappearance, arbitrary 
detention and torture of journalists.
Indicator 16.10.2
Number of countries that adopt and implement constitutional, statutory and/or 
policy guarantees for public access to information.2 
Through the unanimous adoption of the 2030 Agenda in 2015, all UN Member 
States agreed that the rule of law and fundamental freedoms are key to the 
realisation of sustainable development.3 
Discussion points:
	` Have you personally ever felt that your ideas or opinions are not regarded by others as  
worthy of discussion? If so, how did you feel?
	` You are not a judge or legal scholar but do you feel that you understand the principles of  
law regarding freedom of expression well enough?
2 See UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. SDG Indicators Metadata repository. https:/ /unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/
3 See UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. https:/ /sdgs.un.org/2030agenda
| 15
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 11. 1. 1 Democratic freedoms
Freedom of expression, although defined in its own right, is a term which often encompasses other 
closely related freedoms. 
	` Freedom of expression: The freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all 
kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any 
other media of his or her choice. 
	` Freedom of assembly: The freedom to intentionally gather in a space for a common expressive 
purpose.
	` Freedom of association: The freedom to associate with others, including to form and join trade 
unions for the protection of individual and collective interests.
	` Freedom of public participation: The right of everyone to take part in the conduct of public affairs, 
directly or through freely chosen representatives.4  
	` Freedom of the media: The right of various forms of media, including print, radio, television, and 
online media, to operate freely, independently and in a pluralistic manner in society without 
government control, restriction, or censorship.
If the State aims to guarantee the International Human Rights Law it has ratified, it ordinarily protects 
its citizens’ rights to these freedoms, and, if the LEAs are organs of the State, they too are mandated to 
protect these rights.
Freedoms relevant to this T oolkit:
	`Freedom of Expression5 
	`Freedom of Assembly
	`Freedom of Association
	`Freedom of Participation
	`Freedom of the Media
If there is no freedom of expression, the other freedoms are pointless. If the 
other freedoms do not exist, freedom of expression is worthless. In this, they are 
inextricably linked.
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) binding on the majority of UN Member 
States captures these rights in several of its articles:
4  Article 19. 2016. The Right to Protest: Principles on the protection of human rights in protests  
https:/ /www.article19.org/data/files/medialibrary/38581/Right_to_protest_principles_final.pdf, p.9
5 Incorporating freedoms of speech and access to information
16 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsArticle 19 
1. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference. 
2.   Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, 
receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing 
or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.
3.  The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and 
responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as 
are provided by law and are necessary: 
 (a)  For respect of the rights or reputations of others; 
 (b)   For the protection of national security or of public order ( ordre public ), or of public health  
or morals.
Article 21 
The right of peaceful assembly shall be recognised. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of 
this right other than those imposed in conformity with the law and which are necessary in a democratic 
society in the interests of national security or public safety, public order ( ordre public ), the protection of 
public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 22 
1.   Everyone shall have the right to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and 
join trade unions for the protection of his interests. 
2.  No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those which are prescribed by 
law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public 
safety, public order ( ordre public ), the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the 
rights and freedoms of others. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on 
members of the armed forces and of the police in their exercise of this right. 
Article 25 
Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity, without any of the distinctions mentioned in 
article 2 and without unreasonable restrictions: 
 (a) T o take part in the conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives; 
 (b)  T o vote and to be elected at genuine periodic elections which shall be by universal and  
equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression of the will  
of the electors;6  
Although the ICCPR does not explicitly mention freedom of the media, Article 19 does encapsulate this 
under freedom of expression. Note that, as of mid-2022, 173 states had effectively legally ratified the 
ICCPR, indicating their consent to be bound to the Covenant.7 
Discussion points:
	` Has your State signed and ratified the ICCPR?
	` If so, does your State’s laws reflect those rights enshrined in ICCPR?
6 OHCHR. 1966. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. https:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx
7  See the UN Treaty Collection website to see all member states that have legally ratified the ICCPR:  
https:/ /treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?chapter=4&clang=_en&mtdsg_no=IV-4&src=IND . For an explanation as to what that means see the glossary: 
https:/ /treaties.un.org/pages/overview.aspx?path=overview/glossary/page1_en.xml
| 17
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 11.2  Freedom of Expression: A Fundamental 
Right, Everywhere
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; 
this right includes freedom to hold opinions without 
interference  and to seek, receive and impart information  
and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.”
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted 10 December 1948
Freedom of expression is one of the cornerstones of all systems of democratic government. Without 
such freedom, news, ideas and discourse about how to protect and preserve the common good in 
open societies would be severely restricted. Such ideas and discourse are therefore essential for the 
maintenance of good governance, peace and democracy. As such, without freedom of expression, 
the other freedoms – of media, assembly, participation and association – would be, by default, denied. 
Thus, the freedom of expression is not only fundamental to the exercise of these wider rights but is 
therefore a fundamental right in itself. 
As seen above, freedom of expression is enshrined in international political thinking, recognised both 
in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and in Articles 19 and 20 of the 
ICCPR. This has trickled down to be further captured in several regional declarations:
Article 13(1) (Freedom of Thought and Expression) of the American Convention on Human 
Rights (ACHR or American Convention)
 Everyone has the right to freedom of thought and expression. This right includes freedom to seek, 
receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing, in 
print, in the form of art, or through any other medium of one’s choice.8 
Article IV (Right to freedom of investigation, opinion, expression and dissemination) of the 
American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man
 Every person has the right to freedom of investigation, of opinion, and of the expression and 
dissemination of ideas, by any medium whatsoever.9 
Article 4 of the Inter-American Democratic Charter
  T ransparency in government activities, probity, responsible public administration on the part of 
governments, respect for social rights, and freedom of expression and of the press are essential 
components of the exercise of democracy.10 
Article 9 of the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights (Banjul Charter)
1. Every individual shall have the right to receive information. 
2.  Every individual shall have the right to express and disseminate his opinions within the law.11 
8 OAS. 1969. American Convention on Human Rights (ACHR). https:/ /www.cidh.oas.org/basicos/english/basic3.american%20convention.htm
9 OAS. 1948. American Declaration of The Rights and Duties of Man. https:/ /www.cidh.oas.org/basicos/english/basic2.american%20declaration.htm
10 OAS. 2001. Inter-American Democratic Charter. https:/ /www.oas.org/charter/docs/resolution1_en_p4.htm
11 African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights. 1981. African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. https://www.achpr.org/legalinstruments/detail?id=49
18 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsPrinciple 23 of the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration
 Every person has the right to freedom of opinion and expression, including freedom to hold opinions 
without interference and to seek, receive and impart information, whether orally, in writing or through 
any other medium of that person’s choice.12 
Sana’a Declaration on Promoting Independent and Pluralistic Arab Media
…States should provide, and reinforce where they exist, constitutional and legal guarantees of freedom 
of expression and of press freedom and should abolish those laws and measures that limit the freedom 
of the press; government tendencies to draw limits / ‘red lines’ outside the purview of the law restrict 
these freedoms and are unacceptable;13 
Principle 1 of Commonwealth principles on freedom of expression and the role of the media 
in good governance 
Freedom of expression is a cornerstone of democracy and underpins good governance, public 
accountability and respect for all human rights. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression, which 
includes the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds through any media and 
regardless of frontiers. Member states are urged to respect the right to freedom of expression and 
promote the free flow of information and ideas.14  
Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)
Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and 
to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of 
frontiers. This Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of broadcasting, television or 
cinema enterprises.15  
Article 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions 
and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and 
regardless of frontiers.
2. The freedom and pluralism of the media shall be respected.16 
As the list above shows, the principles of freedom of expression, and its associated freedoms, are 
recognised across the globe at an international level, reiterated many times. Many states have their 
own laws based upon these principles at the national level.
Discussion points:
	` Accepting that there may be limitations or exemptions, do any of the excerpts from the 
declarations above contradict the basic legal premises of your State?
12 ASEAN. 2012. ASEAN Human Rights Declaration. https:/ /asean.org/asean-human-rights-declaration/
13 UN/UNESCO. 1996. Declaration of the Seminar on Promoting Independent and Pluralistic Arab Media. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000105660
14  Commonwealth Working Group on Media and Good Governance. 2018. Commonwealth principles on freedom of expression and the role of the media in good 
governance. https:/ /commonwealthlawyers.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Commonwealth-Principles-role-of-the-media-in-good-governance.pdf
15 CoE. 1950. European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). https:/ /www.echr.coe.int/Pages/home.aspx?p=basictexts/convention
16 EC. 2000. Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/treaty/char_2012/oj
| 19
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 11.3 The Key Characteristics
Freedom of expression is essential for allowing the effective 
mechanisms of rule of law. These mechanisms enable open 
debate, negotiation, collaboration, the expressing of diverse 
perspectives and consensual decision making.  Any suppression 
of legal expression according to international standards may 
hide or mask problems which can subsequently erupt in much 
more perilous and unstable forms”
The principles expressed by the ICCPR regarding freedom of expression and its associated 
freedoms, and captured in regional declarations and many national policies, can be seen to possess 
key attributes as follows: 
1. The right’s protection is an obligation of the State 
Ensuring the freedom of expression, just like all human rights, is the responsibility of the State, rather 
than individual private citizens. The State is obliged to respect and not violate this right. In addition, in 
protecting the right, the State may take action to safeguard the individuals’ right to freedom of expression 
against others. Such measures may include regulations against hate speech or inciting violence. 
2. The right has both negative and positive aspects 
The State is obliged, within very strict limits, to not interfere or prevent freedom of expression. This 
is called ‘negative protection’ of the right to freedom of expression, in that it prevents the State from 
acting to curb that right.
On the flip side, the State is positively obliged, by default, to ensure the free flow of information and ideas 
amongst its citizens. This obligation often requires positive and proactive measures to protect freedom 
of expression. Such measures could extend from preventing monopolies in the media sector through 
regulation to preventing attacks on journalists and ensuring their safety. Such positive measures are 
obligations and may, in certain circumstances, involve proactive action by LEAs to protect freedom of 
expression, such as when journalists are threatened and intimidated.
3. The right belongs to everyone 
Under international law, the right to freedom of expression, applies to everyone, of any age, and gender 
and in any circumstances. This means that not only do law-abiding adult male and female citizens of 
States have this right but it also applies, for example, to children, prisoners and foreigners working and 
living in the State in any capacity, including foreign journalists.
20 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents4. The right concerns two-way information 
The right of freedom of expression is not just about allowing citizens and the media to transmit or impart 
their ideas, views or information, but equally concerns the right to seek and receive these. In effect, this 
covers a two-way process – the right to express oneself but also the right to hear what others say. In 
this, it is just as important to protect the rights of readers, listeners and viewers to receive information as 
it is to protect those who impart it. In allowing individuals to be able to participate in decision-making in 
society, they must have the ability to access, analyse, understand and act upon information. This ability 
is protected by the right just as strongly as the right to impart information and ideas. Media freedom 
is not just about allowing journalists to report stories but also allowing others to receive them and 
therefore deserves special protection as part of ensuring freedom of expression.
Further, under international law, this also covers the right to access information directly from State 
bodies and public institutions. This is increasingly enshrined in national Freedom of Information 
Acts (FOIA) or Access to Information (A TI) laws whereby States are obliged to respond to requests 
for information, adjudicated by independent oversight bodies. This right is also increasingly being 
supported through open government, enabled through digital technology, whereby proactive release 
and disclosure of information is carried out.17 
5. The right covers all kinds of ideas 
Under international law, all forms of expression are protected, subject to a limited regime of exceptions 
(see below). It does not matter how important, or not, the authorities consider certain forms of 
expression to be, they are all protected. This is true regardless of whether the expression is factually 
correct, and even if it is considered to be offensive by many people. Thus, the right covers advertising 
and commercial information, and even incorrect information. Unpopular and even “crazy” ideas are 
also protected. Indeed, to some extent it is more important to protect these sorts of ideas than popular 
ones, which do not need protection from the State. 
6. The right to applies regardless of frontiers 
Freedom of expression does not recognise national borders. All citizens, regardless of where they 
are, have a right to seek and receive information, via any medium, from anywhere. T oday, the Internet 
is obviously the predominant medium allowing citizens to access content from around the world. As 
with all forms of expression, limited restrictions may be imposed on the right, but these must meet the 
standards of international law. 
7. The right includes expression via any medium 
A medium in its truest definition is any means by which something is communicated or expressed; 
media is its plural. Freedom of expression applies regardless of how, and therefore through what 
medium, someone seeks to express themselves. This is captured by the term “any other media of 
his choice” in Article 19 of the ICCPR. Examples of protected forms of dissemination of information 
include newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, radio, television, Internet, books, mobile telephones, 
public meetings, comics, house-to-house canvassing, paintings, sculptures, poetry, cartoons, smoke 
signals, Morse code, face-to-face conversations, and sometimes even clothing style (for example, in 
some countries certain colours of clothing denote support for a certain political party). 
17 UN/UNESCO. 2021. Journalism is a Public Good: World trends in freedom of expression and media development; Global report 2021/2022  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380618
| 21
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 18. The right protects against both direct and indirect limitations 
Any measures the State takes which limit freedom of expression, either directly or indirectly, are 
considered interferences with the right, unless proved to the contrary or otherwise justified. Direct 
limitations may be more obvious but indirect limitations may be more subtle. Some common examples 
of indirect attempts to restrict freedom of expression are where a government imposes special taxes 
on the media to make it difficult for them to operate, or only places advertisements in media which 
support the government or which refrain from criticising it.
9. The right’s protection is independent and apolitical
It is the State, not any single government, party or ideology, that has the obligation to protect freedom 
of expression and its associated freedoms. In this, the State must ensure the apolitical nature of 
any oversight, assessment or moderation regarding these freedoms. Equally, such oversight, 
assessment or moderation must be independent and free from influence from the State. Further, 
that independence should be free from other political or commercial influence. Regulatory bodies, 
information commissions, national ombudsmen and the like must be non-partisan and autonomous.
This stance must be reflected in the professional work of LEAs. Officers, although they may have 
political views just as any other citizen, should be scrupulously politically objective in the way they carry 
out their tasks. Operationally, criticism of a government or of security forces themselves, for example, 
shall have no bearing on how LEAs behave.
10. The right covers diversity and pluralism of information
Not only should citizens have access to information but that information should be from a wide 
spectrum of sources. Encouraging a diverse media is an important factor in ensuring this plurality of 
information available to citizens. Likewise, ensuring wider availability of media channels, from niche, 
alternative outlets through to local and community media, increasingly distributed via digital means, is 
fundamental to maintaining the right. In many countries, this diversity and pluralism is enshrined in law 
through media regulations.
Key Characteristics of the right to freedom of expression
	`The right’s protection is obligation of the State
	`The right has both negative and positive aspects 
	`The right belongs to everyone
	`The right concerns two-way information
	`The right covers all kinds of ideas
	`The right to applies regardless of frontiers
	`The right includes expression via any medium
	`The right protects against both direct and indirect limitations 
	`The right’s protection is independent and apolitical
	`The right covers diversity and pluralism of information
Discussion points:
	` Can you think of any indirect limitations applied to freedom of expression in your country?
	`  If so, can they be justified?
22 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents1.4 The Law, its Institutions and Enforcement
The UN defines “policing” as a function of governance responsible for the prevention, detection and 
investigation of crime; the protection of persons and property; and the maintenance of public order and 
safety. Policing must be entrusted to civil servants who are members of police or other law enforcement 
agencies of national, regional or local governments, within a legal framework that is based on the rule 
of law.18  Note that this definition does not apply only to democratic states. 
The rule of law is a principle of governance in which all persons, institutions and 
entities, public and private, including the State itself, are accountable to laws that are 
publicly promulgated, equally enforced and independently adjudicated, and which 
are consistent with international human rights norms and standards. It requires 
measures to ensure adherence to the principles of supremacy of the law, equality 
before the law, accountability to the law, fairness in the application of the law, 
separation of powers, participation in decision-making, legal certainty, avoidance of 
arbitrariness, and procedural and legal transparency.19 
The rule of law is a fundamental principle embraced in most modern states. In these cases, 
constitutions encompass the fundamental and supreme law of the State, with the rule of law dictating 
the enforcement of those principles above all other laws. Some constitutions also preserve these 
fundamental principles and values by making the process of amendment subject to full democratic 
oversight by elected parliaments or political assemblies; the legislatures. The judiciary acts as the 
guardian of the rule of law and thus its independence and proper functioning is a prerequisite for a just 
legal system, the right to a fair hearing and access to justice.
In implementing the rule of law, LEAs are a primary arm of the executive and are the legitimate entities 
required to enforce the rule of law as defined by legislatures. Put simply, LEAs typically are responsible 
for maintaining public order and safety, enforcing the law, and preventing, detecting, and investigating 
criminal activities.
Regardless of specific demands of a State’s legislature and judiciary, LEAs should be guided by the 
ethos enshrined in the UDHR, which in Article 29(2) states:
Everyone shall be subject to such limitation  as are determined 
by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and 
respect for the right and freedom of others and of meeting the 
just requirements of morality, public order and the general 
welfare in a democratic society” 20 
18 UN. 2016. S/2016/952. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/848590?ln=en , para 7
19 For further information on the rule of law, see the UN website: https:/ /www.un.org/ruleoflaw/what-is-the-rule-of-law/
20 OHCHR. 1979. Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/10639?ln=en
| 23
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1UDHR underpins the internationally recognised ‘Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials’ 21  
agreed by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and further detailed in the 
‘Handbook on police accountability, oversight and integrity’ 22  produced by the United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
UNODC states that, amongst others, the key elements of an effective police accountability system 
include: 
	` Opportunities for the public to voice their concerns 
	` A working culture that promotes transparency and evaluation 
	` Complaints procedures, both for making complaints to the police directly and to  
independent bodies 
	` An independent body to oversee such procedures 
	` Scrutiny and oversight involving feedback to the police in order to improve future activities  
and prevent future wrongdoings 
	` Reliable statistics on police performance, related both to effectiveness in dealing with crime  
and public order, as well as to their integrity and public confidence 
	` Procedures for overseeing the feedback, evaluation and complaints procedures and statistics23  
All these points, with their emphasis that LEAs should be accountable to the law rather than the 
government, have direct relevance to the role of LEAs to protect freedom of expression. This direct 
responsibility is strongly implicit within the notion of democratic law enforcement. Equally, however, 
LEAs are directly responsible for maintenance of public order. These two responsibilities, of equal 
weight, can sometimes appear to be at odds with one another. With particular powers to temporarily 
deprive citizens of their freedom, limit the full enjoyment of their rights, and, in extreme circumstances, to 
even use lethal force, LEAs also have duty to protect and respect the individual’s fundamental rights and 
freedoms and perform their duties in accordance with universally agreed standards of human rights. 
This can often lead to LEA officers finding themselves facing dilemmas. T o carry out their complex 
role, LEAs must earn the public’s trust and confidence and demonstrate professionalism and integrity 
by adhering to the rule of law and a code of professional conduct. However, when enforcing the law, 
despite legal texts, policies and codes, LEA officers must often take, at a moment’s notice and in 
dynamic situations, discretionary decisions, albeit guided by legal doctrine. 
A discretionary decision means a decision requiring the exercise of judgment in 
the process of approving or disapproving a particular activity, as distinguished from 
situations where one merely has to determine whether there has been conformity 
with fixed standards or objective measurements contained in applicable statutes, 
ordinances, or regulations.
21 OHCHR. 1979. Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/10639?ln=en  
22  UNODC. 2011. Handbook on police accountability, oversight and integrity  
https:/ /www.unodc.org/pdf/criminal_justice/Handbook_on_police_Accountability_Oversight_and_Integrity.pdf
23 Ibid, pp. iv-v
24 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents1.5 Limitations and Restrictions
Any restrictions imposed by the State, and thus enforced by its LEA, must be sufficiently and reasonably 
justified, in accordance with Articles 19(3) of the ICCPR, as stated above. T o be legitimate, all restrictions 
on freedom of expression must comply with a three-part test,24  whereby restrictions must: 
	` Be provided for by a law; 
	` Pursue a legitimate aim; and 
	` Be deemed necessary, useful, and rationally connected to such a legitimate aim pursued in a 
democratic society.25 
Article 19
3.  The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries 
with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain 
restrictions, but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are 
necessary: 
 (a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others; 
 (b)  For the protection of national security or of public order ( ordre public ), or of 
public health or morals.
These need to be examined in more detail, as is done in the publication, ‘The Right to Protest: Principles 
on the protection of human rights in protests’ 26 , upon which the text below is based.
The protection of human rights is paramount and therefore limitation must be used as an exception, not 
as standard practice. States should ensure that such rights are subject to restrictions only on grounds 
specified in international law. In particular, no restriction on the rights to freedom of expression and its 
associated freedoms of assembly, association, participation and media may be imposed unless the 
restriction … 
TEST 1 …is prescribed by law (legality): 
Any restriction must have a formal basis in law which is accessible and formulated with sufficient 
precision to enable individuals to foresee whether a particular action is in breach of the law and to 
assess the likely consequences of any breach.
TEST 2 …pursues a legitimate aim: 
Any restriction must be shown by the government to have the genuine purpose and demonstrable 
effect of protecting a legitimate aim.
Legitimate aims can be defined more precisely. These are accepted to fall into the following six 
categories:
24  For a video introduction to the three-part test see  
https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wg8fVtHPDag&list=PLWuYED1WVJIPIUZYWwde1wWpY osDL -joE&index=19
25  UNESCO. 2021. Global toolkit for judicial actors: international legal standards on freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists.  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000378755 , p. 36
26  Article19. 2016. The Right to Protest: Principles on the protection of human rights in protests  
https:/ /www.article19.org/data/files/medialibrary/38581/Right_to_protest_principles_final.pdf , pp.12-16
| 25
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1National Security. National security may be invoked only to protect a country’s existence or its 
territorial integrity against the use or threat of force, or its capacity to respond to the use or threat of 
force, whether from an external or internal source.
Case Study – Germany, 2015
The Bundesverwaltungsgericht  (German Federal Administrative Court) refused to grant 
an order permitting a newspaper access to information from the Bundesnachrichtendienst  
(Federal Intelligence Service) about the names of German companies and citizens on the 
“selector lists” of the US National Security Agency. The newspaper asked the Court to find 
that Grundgesetz  (German Basic Law) included the right of the press to obtain information 
from federal agencies. The German Federal Administrative Court found that this right 
existed, as long as it did not stand in conflict with legitimate private or public interests in the 
confidentiality of the information being sought. It went on to say that giving the press access 
to information about the operational procedures of the Federal Intelligence Service would 
impede its work, including its ability to work with foreign intelligence services. As a result, it 
could not grant the order.27 
Public Order. Public order may be invoked only where protests present a genuine and sufficiently 
serious threat to the functioning of society or the fundamental principles on which society is founded, 
such as the respect of human rights and the rule of law. Exercising the right to protest, including 
spontaneous, simultaneous and counter protests, should be considered an essential characteristic of 
public order and not a de facto threat to it, even where the protest causes inconvenience or disruption. 
Public Health. Public health may be invoked in protests only if it is evidence-based and where there is 
a serious threat to health. The measures must be specifically aimed at preventing disease or injury, or 
providing care for the sick and injured, and be simultaneously applied in the case of other activities for 
which people ordinarily gather.28 
Public Morals. Public morals may be invoked only if the restriction is demonstrably essential to the 
maintenance of respect for the fundamental values of the community, and while respecting the 
universality of human rights, the principle of non-discrimination, and the rule of law. Given the evolving 
nature of morality, limitations should never derive exclusively from a single tradition and should never 
be used to justify discriminatory practices, perpetuate prejudice or promote intolerance. A concept of 
public morals that excludes the notion of fundamental human rights should always be understood as 
contrary to its contemporary meaning.
Protecting the Rights of Others. Many rights are protected by law and threats to them often 
considered crimes and dealt with through normal law enforcement processes. Incitement to violence, 
discrimination and hate speech are such examples. However, beyond the letter of the law covering 
such crimes, the authorities must always strike the proper balance when restricting freedom of 
expression on the basis of protecting the rights of others. This issue is common during protests where 
different groups or individuals involved in protests or those who live, work, or carry on business in the 
affected locality may have their rights curbed by others by protest itself. The balance should always 
fall in favour of those asserting the right to freedom of assembly, unless there is strong evidence to 
justify interference with that right. Such restrictions should not be invoked as a result of other people’s 
opposition to protests or in order to limit political debate.
27  T aken from Columbia Global Freedom of Expression website. For further information see  
https:/ /globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/cases/publisher-v-bundesnachrichtendienst/
28  For further reference, please see UNESCO. 2020. COVID-19: the role of judicial operators in the protection and promotion of the right to freedom of expression: 
guidelines. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4208?posInSet=2&queryId=148e8b4d-2572-4851-8d42-c34004c1dd8b
26 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsPublic Safety. Public safety may be invoked to restrict the rights to freedom of assembly and 
association only against a specified and genuine danger to the life or physical integrity of people, or 
serious damage to their property.
TEST 3 …is necessary and proportionate in pursuit of a legitimate aim. 
Restrictions should be deemed necessary only if there is a pressing social need for the restriction. 
The party invoking the restriction must show a direct and immediate connection between the protest 
and the protected interest. Further, restrictions should not be overly broad and should be the least 
restrictive means available in order to protect the legitimate aim. Any restriction should be shown 
to be compatible with democratic principles, specific and individualised to attaining the particular 
protective outcome and no more intrusive than other instruments capable of achieving the same 
restrictive result. 
The above refer to conditions under normal peacetime circumstances. However, in exceptional 
circumstances, restrictions may be enforced under states of emergency, in which case:
States are permitted to deviate from international human rights commitments only in cases of 
public emergency that threaten the life of the nation; any such deviation must be officially and 
lawfully proclaimed in accordance with both national and international law. Hence, states should 
not resort to declaring a state of emergency in order to specifically limit freedom of expression 
and related freedoms. 
Restrictions to freedom of expression must be:
	`Be provided for by a law; 
	`Pursue a legitimate aim; and 
	`Be deemed necessary, useful, and rationally connected to such a legitimate aim 
pursued in a democratic society
Legitimate aims:
	`National Security
	`Public Order
	`Public Health
	`Public Morals
	`Protecting the Rights of Others
	`Public Safety
| 27
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1Case Study – Rwanda, 2012
The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights (“ACHPR” or the “Commission”) 
held Rwanda responsible for the violation of Article 9 of the African Charter on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights (“the Charter”). This case concerned the conviction and further sentencing 
of journalists following the publication of three articles reporting on Rwanda’s government’s 
shortcomings, alleged corruption charges among high ranking government officials, and the 
ethnic division occurring at the time of the events.
Having due regard to the victims’ conviction on the grounds of defamation and threatening of 
national security, the Commission held that criminal defamation laws are not compatible with 
Article 9 of the Charter since they restrict journalists’ freedom of expression and the public’s 
right to access valuable information. In this sense, the Commission recalled the importance 
of freedom of expression in democratic societies, mainly in encouraging political debate and 
personal development. Furthermore, in light of the criminal sanctions imposed on the victims 
on the grounds set forth above, the Commission concluded that depriving the victims of their 
liberty as a means to regulate or restrict their right to freedom of expression was neither 
necessary nor proportionate in a democratic society.29 
Discussion points:
	` Does the three-part test feature in your legal considerations?
	` Are you content that your activities would pass the three-part test? 
	` Have you any examples of legitimate aims restricting freedom of expression?
29  T aken from Columbia Global Freedom of Expression website. For further information on this case see  
https:/ /globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/cases/agnes-uwimana-nkusi-v-rwanda/
28 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents1.6 Civil and Criminal Laws
1.6. 1 Civil laws 
Generally civil law covers much of what can or cannot be considered sound, fair and proper information, 
content and media reporting. LEAs tend to be involved in responding to infringements of criminal law. 
However, in some states, criminal law can be seen as considered appropriate in certain cases. There 
are international standards which provide guidance on which should be which. 
Defamation 
Defamation can be understood as “unlawful attacks” on a person’s “honour and reputation” as 
contained in Article 17 of the ICCPR. It is broadly accepted that some sort of legal recourse should be 
available for those who believe that their reputation has been unfairly undermined. This should take the 
form of a civil suit by the person who claims their damaged reputation. Thus, defamation as a tort, or 
civil wrong, is widespread across most countries.
In cases where criminal defamation is more widely exercised, it is considered to be a threat to freedom 
of expression. The decriminalization of defamation is strongly recommended by international bodies, 
regional human rights courts and a growing number of national courts. The UN Human Rights 
Committee, which is in charge of examining the conformity of national decisions with the ICCPR, 
encapsulate this:
States parties should consider the decriminalization of 
defamation and, in any case, the application of the criminal 
law should only be countenanced in the most serious of cases 
and imprisonment is never an appropriate penalty . It is 
impermissible for a State party to indict a person for 
criminal defamation but then not to proceed to trial 
expeditiously – such a practice has a chilling effect that may 
unduly restrict the exercise of freedom of expression of the 
person concerned and others”
The penalization of a media outlet, publishers or journalist 
solely for being critical of the government  or the political 
social system espoused by the government can never be 
considered to be a necessary restriction of freedom of 
expression.”
| 29
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1…lese majesty, desacato , disrespect for authority, disrespect for 
flags and symbols, defamation of the head of state and the 
protection of the honour of public officials … should not 
provide for more severe penalties solely on the basis of the 
identity of the person that may have been impugned. States 
parties should not prohibit criticism of institutions , such as 
the army or the administration.” 30 
Definitions
	` Defamation  – unlawful attacks on a person’s honour and reputation 
	` Libel  – defamation in a written or permanent form
	` Slander  – defamation in spoken and unrecorded form
	` Criminal defamation  – defamation prosecuted in the criminal courts
	` Civil defamation  – defamation as a private action to redress a civil wrong
	` Lese majesty  – an offence against the dignity of a reigning sovereign or against 
a state
	` Desacato laws  – criminalise expression which offends, insults, or threatens a 
public functionary in the performance of his or her official duties.
Both lese majesty and desacato laws are deemed incompatible with the 
right to freedom of expression.
Discussion points:
	` T o what extent is defamation criminalised in your State?
	` If it is, does this have a ‘chilling effect’ on freedom of expression?
Privacy
Under Article 12 of UDHR: “No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, 
home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the 
protection of the law against such interference or attacks.” 31  However, the very definition of a journalist 
(see below) directly involves “the gathering of facts and analyses to inform sectors of society or society 
as a whole”, or put plainly, seeking information whose dissemination is in the public interest.
30  OHCHR. 2011. CCPR/C/GC/34. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/715606, paras 47 , 42, and 38 respectively
31 UN. 1948. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). https:/ /www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights
30 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsGenerally speaking, public interest relates to matters affecting the public to such 
an extent that it may rightfully (legitimately) take an interest in them, attracting its 
attention or concerning the public significantly.
Areas considered to be of public interest include yet are not limited to misuse of 
public office, improper use of public money, protection of public health, safety 
and environment, protection of national security, crime and social behaviour and 
similar political and socioeconomic topics.
Journalists may publish ordinarily personal information when it serves a greater 
value and is used to discuss a matter in the public interest (published personal 
information should serve some important purpose). The greater the information 
value for the public, the more the interest of a person in being protected against 
the publication has to yield, and vice versa.32 
Therefore, privacy and media freedom can be found in tension. One person’s right to freedom of 
expression, or the media’s right of freedom to investigate and report, may impinge on someone else’s 
right to privacy and vice versa. This tension is made more difficult because of digital technologies.33 
However, some general principles can be expressed in terms of the extent of and limits to privacy in the 
face of legitimate journalistic endeavour, in a democracy:
	` Maintenance of privacy via laws cannot  be justified if their purpose is merely to protect individuals 
against harm to a reputation which they either do not have or do not merit. In particular, privacy 
laws cannot be justified if their purpose or effect is to prevent legitimate criticism of public figures, 
the exposure of corruption, official wrongdoing, or to protect the reputation of heads of state or 
other public officials or public figures.
	` Maintenance of privacy via laws may  constitute legitimate restrictions on the right to freedom of 
expression if they are sufficiently clear and narrowly defined and their genuine purpose and 
demonstrable effect is to protect individuals from unlawful interferences in, or attacks on, their 
right to private and family life, home and communications.
	` Maintenance of privacy via laws cannot be justified on the grounds that they help maintain public 
order, national security, or friendly relations with foreign states or governments.
	` Laws protecting individuals from substantial harm, including but not limited to harassment, threats 
of violence, the malicious disclosure or distribution of private sexual content (including 
photographs or films), or malicious disclosure of sensitive personal information or personal 
information other than a person’s name or other identifier without consent can  constitute a 
legitimate restriction on the right to freedom of expression provided that they are narrowly drawn, 
contain sufficient defences for the protection of freedom of expression and do not impose 
disproportionate sanctions.34 
32 CoE. 2019. Guidelines on safeguarding privacy in the media. https:/ /edoc.coe.int/en/media/7772-guidelines-on-safeguarding-privacy-in-the-media.html# , p.11
33  UNESCO has developed guidelines for judicial actors to assess matters of privacy and data protection in the face of other rights, such as freedom of expression 
and the right to privacy, and in light of new technologies. See UNESCO. Guidelines for judicial actors on privacy and data protection  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381298?posInSet=1&queryId=148e8b4d-2572-4851-8d42-c34004c1dd8b
34  Adapted from Principle 3 of Article 19. 2017. The Global Principles on Protection of Freedom of Expression and Privacy.  
https:/ /www.article19.org/data/files/medialibrary/38657 /Expression-and-Privacy-Principles-1.pdf
| 31
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1Despite these guidelines, a growing trend over recent years has been the use of strategic lawsuits 
against public participation, or SLAPPs, against media outlets. These lawsuits, using the intricacies of 
both defamation and privacy laws, are intended to censor, intimidate, and silence critics by burdening 
them with the cost of a legal defence until they abandon their criticism or opposition.35 
Discussion points:
	` T o what extent is privacy protected under law in your state?
	` What civil laws in your state may apply to private content in the media?
	` In what ways can an LEA protect privacy?
	` Is there any evidence of SLAPPs being issued in your state?
1.6.2 Criminal laws
In many countries there are specific laws regarding freedom of expression, the breaking of which may 
constitute a criminal offence. While the right to freedom of expression may be generally accepted, 
courts have the right to impose sanctions in the case of certain conditions, notably regarding equality, 
public order or security and public morals, always after applying the three-part test.
Hate speech
Hate speech has been described by the UN as ‘attacks or uses pejorative or discriminatory language 
with reference to a person or a group on the basis of who they are, in other words, based on their 
religion, ethnicity, nationality, race, colour, descent, gender, or other identity factor’.36  This phenomenon 
has been particularly on the rise during the COVID-19 pandemic (see below).37  However, several 
international instruments specifically require that States act to tackle aspects of it:
Article 20(2) of ICCPR.  Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement 
to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law.
Article 13 (5) of the American Convention on Human Rights (ACHR or American Convention). Any 
propaganda for war and any advocacy of national, racial, or religious hatred that constitute incitements 
to lawless violence or to any other similar illegal action against any person or group of persons on any 
grounds including those of race, color, religion, language, or national origin shall be considered as 
offenses punishable by law.
Article 4 of the International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination 
(ICERD).  [States Parties] Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based 
on racial superiority or hatred, incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or 
incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of another colour or ethnic origin.
However, Article 20 of the ICCPR requires a high threshold with regards to hate speech or incitement 
to hatred before limitations of freedom of expression should be considered. The Rabat Plan of Action38  
suggests a six-part threshold test identifying needs to be fulfilled in order for a statement to amount to 
a criminal offence. These six factors are:
35  Index on Censorship. 2020. A gathering storm: the laws being used to silence the media  
https:/ /www.indexoncensorship.org/campaigns/the-laws-being-used-to-silence-media/
36  UN. 2019. Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech. https:/ /www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/documents/UN%20Strategy%20and%20Plan%20of%20
Action%20on%20Hate%20Speech%2018%20June%20SYNOPSIS.pdf
37  Rights for Peace. 2021. ‘Virus of prejudice’: is coronavirus increasing hate speech and scapegoating?  
https:/ /www.rightsforpeace.org/post/virus-of-prejudice-is-coronavirus-increasing-hate-speech-and-scapegoating
38 For a video introduction to the six-part threshold see https:/ /www.unesco.org/archives/multimedia/document-5554-eng-3
32 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents	` Context of the statement
	` Speaker’s position or status
	` Intent to incite audience against target
	` Content and form of the statement
	` Extent of its dissemination
	` Likelihood of harm including imminence
Six-part threshold test
Context: Context is of great importance when assessing whether particular 
statements are likely to incite discrimination, hostility or violence against the target 
group, and it may have a direct bearing on both intent and/or causation. Analysis 
of the context should place the speech act within the social and political context 
prevalent at the time the speech was made and disseminated;
Speaker: The speaker’s position or status in the society should be considered, 
specifically the individual’s or organization’s standing in the context of the audience 
to whom the speech is directed;
Intent: Article 20 of the ICCPR anticipates intent. Negligence and recklessness are not 
sufficient for an act to be an offence under article 20 of the ICCPR, as this article provides 
for “advocacy” and “incitement” rather than the mere distribution or circulation of material. 
In this regard, it requires the activation of a triangular relationship between the object and 
subject of the speech act as well as the audience;
Content and form: The content of the speech constitutes one of the key foci of 
the court’s deliberations and is a critical element of incitement. Content analysis 
may include the degree to which the speech was provocative and direct, as well as 
the form, style, nature of arguments deployed in the speech or the balance struck 
between arguments deployed;
Extent of the speech act: Extent includes such elements as the reach of the 
speech act, its public nature, its magnitude and size of its audience. Other elements 
to consider include whether the speech is public, what means of dissemination are 
used, for example by a single leaflet or broadcast in the mainstream media or via 
the Internet, the frequency, the quantity and the extent of the communications, 
whether the audience had the means to act on the incitement, whether the 
statement (or work) is circulated in a restricted environment or widely accessible 
to the general public;
Likelihood, including imminence: Incitement, by definition, is an inchoate 
crime.39  The action advocated through incitement speech does not have to be 
committed for said speech to amount to a crime. Nevertheless, some degree 
of risk of harm must be identified. It means that the courts will have to determine 
that there was a reasonable probability that the speech would succeed in inciting 
actual action against the target group, recognizing that such causation should be 
rather direct.40 
39  An inchoate crime refers to a crime that anticipates or prepares for a further crime. Incitement is an example of an inchoate crime; this means that incitement is a 
crime regardless the criminal action being incited occurs. See Media Legal Defence Initiative. 2020. Training Manual on International and Comparative Media and 
Freedom of Expression Law. https:/ /www.mediadefence.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/MLDI.FoEManual.Version1.1.pdf , pp. 82, 116
40  Background to the Rabat Plan of Action can be found at: https:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/FreedomOpinion/Articles19-20/Pages/Index.aspx
| 33
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1Discussion points:
	` Does your State have ‘hate speech’ laws or something similar?
	` If so, are general principles of the six-steps observed?
Security and Public Order
As is seen above, through ICCPR and the three-part test, national security is one of the permissible 
grounds for limitation of the right to freedom of expression. Yet, national security is one of the most 
common justifications cited by states for limiting freedom of expression and the most ambiguous. 
One difficulty is the impulse of many governments to assume that it is legitimate to restrict all public 
discourse on national security issues. 
For the purpose of protecting national security, the right to 
freedom of expression and information can be restricted only 
in the most serious cases of a direct political or military threat 
to the entire nation.” 41 
 
As such, several common reasons for restricting freedom of expression are considered unjustifiable:  
to protect a government from embarrassment or exposure of 
wrongdoing, or to conceal information about the functioning 
of its public institutions, or to entrench a particular ideology, 
or to suppress industrial unrest.” 42 
withhold information concerning violations of international 
human rights and humanitarian law, including information 
about the circumstances and perpetrators of torture and 
crimes against humanity, and the location of secret prisons. 
This includes information about past abuses under previous 
regimes, and any information they hold regarding violations 
committed by their own agents or by others.” 43 
41  UN Economic and Social Council. 1995. E/CN.4/1995/32  
https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=E%2FCN.4%2F1995%2F32&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False , para. 48
42  Article 19. 1996. The Johannesburg Principles on National Security, Freedom of Expression and Access to Information  
https:/ /www.article19.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/joburg-principles.pdf , Principle 2b
43  Open Society Foundations. 2013. The T shwane Principles on National Security and the Right to Information  
https:/ /www.justiceinitiative.org/uploads/45d4db46-e2c4-4419-932b-6b9aadad7c38/tshwane-principles-15-points-09182013.pdf , Principle 10A
34 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agentsto keep state secrets or other information confidential that 
prevents victims of human rights violations from seeking or 
obtaining a remedy for their violation.” 44  45 
There may be many circumstances where the open reporting and discussion of national security 
issues may actually strengthen national security.
Regarding public order, there is no specific internationally agreed definition to explain the concept. 
However, sound public order is generally considered to include both legal and physical guarantees of 
freedom and security; those state obligations to defend in order to guarantee public safety and protect 
the interests of society as a whole. The criminal aspects of public order are indicated by acts which 
deny these guarantees by breaking the law, interfering with the operations of society and the ability of 
people to function efficiently, and therefore labelled criminal. Note that it is generally not considered an 
act against the state but rather against society.
There appears a fine line as to what can be deemed contrary to or accepted as shared norms, societal 
values and accepted customs, which presents a particular problem for LEAs, often requiring a degree 
of discretion to be exercised by officers. From a heated disagreement verbalised in a public setting 
to a fight between two individuals, from a small but noisy party to a large gathering of sports fans; 
all of which may involve insulting or upsetting language – these may or may not present instances 
which fall into the category of public order offenses, but that judgement may depend upon context 
and circumstances. Many individual states may provide some specific guidance in how officers may 
consider these situations.46 
From a policing perspective, threats to public order are often considered in the context of public safety 
and public assemblies (explored in Modules 4 and 5).
Discussion points:
	` Have you been provided with enough guidance to allow you to make reasonable judgements, 
or discretion, with regards to freedom of expression, its legitimate limits and public order?
Protection of Morals
Most States have in place certain restrictions on freedom of expression to protect public morals, such 
as rules on obscenity. While it is accepted that what constitutes an appropriate limitation on freedom of 
expression to protect morals does vary from society to society, there are also limits to this. As the UN 
Human Rights Committee stated in its 2011 General Comment:
44 Ibid, Principle 30
45  The Tshwane Principles, drafted in 2013, were an update of the Johannesburg Principles (1995), providing guidance on the extent of the national security limitation 
in relation to media freedom. Although they only constitute non-binding international law, these principles were established on the basis of wide consensus among 
international experts and stakeholders on freedom of the media
46  For example, in the UK’s Public Order Legislation, Freedom of Expression elements (Public Order Act 1986, Section 29J of Part 3A) states that, for the avoidance 
of doubt, the rules on public order must not be applied “in a way which prohibits or restricts discussion, criticism or expressions of antipathy, dislike, ridicule, insult or 
abuse of particular religions or the beliefs or practices of their adherents, or of any other belief system or the beliefs or practices of its adherents, or proselytising or 
urging adherents of a different religion or belief system to cease practising their religion or belief system.” See GOV U.K. 1986. Public Order Act 1986  
https:/ /www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1986/64/part/3A
| 35
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1…the concept of morals derives from many social, 
philosophical and religious traditions; consequently, 
limitations… for the purpose of protecting morals must be 
based on principles not deriving exclusively from a single 
tradition”. Any such limitations must be understood in the 
light of universality of human rights and the principle of  
non-discrimination.”  47 
A particular issue here is the legitimate scope of laws which aim to protect the religious sensitivities 
of believers. Many states no longer have blasphemy laws on the books and in others these laws have 
not been used for many years. Protection of religion as such does not meet the threshold of necessity 
to protect people’s right to hold opinions. Perhaps the clearest statement on this is found in the 2011 
General Comment adopted by the UN Human Rights Committee:
Prohibitions of displays of lack of respect for a religion  
or other belief system, including blasphemy laws, are 
incompatible with the Covenant, except in the specific 
circumstances envisaged in article 20, paragraph 2  
[Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that 
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence 
shall be prohibited by law.], of the Covenant. Such prohibitions 
must also comply with the strict requirements of article 19, 
paragraph 3, as well as [other specific articles].
Thus, for instance, it would be impermissible for any such 
laws to discriminate in favour of or against one or certain 
religions or belief systems, or their adherents over another,  
or religious believers over non-believers. Nor would it be 
permissible for such prohibitions to be used to prevent or 
punish criticism of religious leaders or commentary on 
religious doctrine and tenets of faith.” 48 
47 OHCHR. 2011. CCPR/C/GC/34. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/715606 , para. 32
48 OHCHR. 2011. CCPR/C/GC/34. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/715606 , para 48
36 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents1.7 Current trends
By most metrics, the numbers of citizens facing challenges to their rights to freedom of expression 
across the world is increasing; the situation is worsening. The data is stark as shown below:
Over the last five years, 
approximately
85%of the world’s population 
have experienced a 
decline in press freedom in 
their country
Source: Analysis by Data-Pop Alliance, based on data from V-Dem 
Institute and the World Bank.
 At least
57
laws
have been adopted or amended since 2016 
that contain overtly vague language or 
disproportionate punishments that threaten online 
freedom or expression and press freedom
Source: Compiled by UNESCO with input from the Centro de Estudios 
en Libertad de Expresión y Acceso a la Información , Centre for Law and 
Democracy, Poynter Institute, University of Westminster, International 
Press Institute and Cyrilla.across 44
countries
Figure 1.1: Decline in press freedom49  Figure 1.2: Laws threatening freedom of expression50 
In the last five years, government requests for content 
removal on major internet platforms have doubled
Source: Data from Google, Facebook, and Twitter,  
analysed by Data-Pop AllianceInternet shutdowns
X2x
Source: Access Now201675
2020155
2017106
2018196
2019213OFF
Figure 1.3: Internet interference51 
Confirming this data, the Global Expression Report (GxR) metric, used by the NGO Article 19, takes 
25 indicators to assess the situation and shows that it is the worst it has been in over a decade.52  There 
are many variables contributing to this, not least ones borne of politics globally and nationally, but within 
the last few years the COVID-19 pandemic, heightened levels of disinformation and increased use of 
rapidly developing technology stand out.
49  UNESCO. 2021. World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2021/2022 – Highlights  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379826 , p.15
50 Ibid
51 Ibid
52 Article19. 2021. The Global Expression Report 2021. https:/ /www.article19.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07 /A19-GxR-2021-FINAL.pdf , p. 22
| 37
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 11.7. 1 The impact of COVID- 19
As the COVID-19 pandemic took hold globally, a rapidly increasing number of governments saw 
fit to impose severe restrictions on freedoms, notably freedom of expression and its associated 
freedoms, as a means of containment. By early April 2020, a majority of governments had introduced 
severe limitations on the freedom of assembly, occasionally complete lockdowns, which in many 
cases curtailed further civil and political rights. While many international human rights organizations 
recognised that even such drastic restrictions may be legitimate responses and in line with accepted 
provisions of limitation on freedom of expression there was, and remains, a serious concern that some 
governments used the opportunities to exploit the situation for political purposes.53  However, such 
measures need to be necessary, proportional and in narrowly worded regulation.54 
Under international human rights law, regarding the right to health, governments are in fact obliged to 
do their best to prevent, treat and control “epidemic, endemic, occupational and other diseases”.55 
T o see the trend in action, the International Centre for No-Profit Law (ICNL) provide a COVID-19 Civic 
Freedom T racker56  noting that, as of late 2021, 58 countries had enforced measures that affected 
freedom of expression and 152 had measures in place that affected freedom of assembly.
While the pandemic has, sometimes legitimately, required a degree of limitations on the right to freedom 
of expression, it can rightly be argued that the protection of this freedom is even more vital in such 
crises. The proper protection of this right served to facilitate and preserve keeping the public educated 
about the pandemic, ensuring that health-care professionals have access to global information about 
the disease and the steps to address it, and guaranteeing that the public had access to information 
held by public authorities concerning the pandemic. Media and journalists were able to report about 
the different aspects and implications of the pandemic, bringing to light falsehoods and conspiracy 
theories, and the insufficient actions of Internet companies in responding to mis- and disinformation.57 
Ultimately, the need for freedom of expression does not cease in a crisis, it becomes more essential 
allowing the public diverse sources of information in order for citizens to access what is true and to 
avoid being manipulated, or becoming victim to rumour.
Discussion points:
	` Have you been involved in policing or security actions as a result of the pandemic?
	` If so, how might they have affected the right to freedom of expression?
	` Were you aware of the legality, necessity and proportionality of those actions?
53  See Amnesty International. 2020. Responses to COVID-19 and states’ human rights obligations: preliminary observations  
https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/pol30/1967/2020/en/  and Human Rights Watch. 2020. Respect rights in COVID-19 response: recommendations for 
governments in addressing pandemic. https:/ /www.hrw.org/news/2020/03/19/human-rights-dimensions-covid-19-response
54  UNESCO. 2020. COVID-19: the role of judicial operators in the protection and promotion of the right to freedom of expression: guidelines  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4208?posInSet=2&queryId=148e8b4d-2572-4851-8d42-c34004c1dd8b
55 OHCHR. 1966. International covenant on economic, social and cultural rights. https:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/cescr.aspx
56 ICNL ’s COVID-19 Civic Freedom Tracker is available at: https:/ /www.icnl.org/covid19tracker/
57  UNESCO. 2020. COVID-19: the role of judicial operators in the protection and promotion of the right to freedom of expression: guidelines  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4208 , p.5
38 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThe need to counter the rise in hate speech (see above) has sometimes been used as a pretext for 
restrictive actions during the pandemic. In response, guidelines were promulgated in the ‘United 
Nations Guidance Note on Addressing and Countering COVID-19 related Hate Speech’.58  Although 
addressing the issue of hate speech, the principles behind the guidelines are instructive in approaches 
to freedom of expression more broadly, during the pandemic and, further, to any issues that may single 
out individuals, groups or communities and potentially make them targets of hate speech.
The guidelines recommend that States should:
Ensure that legal responses to hate speech are carefully balanced with the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression and the right of access to information, including the free flow of 
scientific information and ideas on the COVID-19 pandemic, including by:
	` ensuring that all limitations to freedom of opinion and expression are provided by law and 
necessary and proportionate to respect the rights or reputation of others, or to protect national 
security, public order, or public health or morals; 
	` refraining from imposing censorship measures unless they meet international human rights 
standards, as such measures may otherwise result in limiting access to important information for 
public health;
	` ensuring the safety of journalists and the protection of sources, including that journalists and 
whistleblowers who have raised legitimate concerns about COVID-19 and responses to it do not 
face criminal prosecution, civil penalties, intimidation or harassment;
	` releasing wrongfully or arbitrarily imprisoned journalists, human rights defenders and activists, 
including those who have been imprisoned for their work related to the COVID-19 pandemic; 
	` refraining from using the COVID-19 pandemic as a pretext for unlawfully restricting the public’s 
access to information and media freedom;
	` lifting all internet shutdowns and restrictions on access to information online, refraining from 
blocking or restricting internet access, and taking active measures to enhance access to the 
internet, including by providing free access, especially to vulnerable or marginalised groups;
	` robustly implementing freedom of information laws to ensure that all individuals, especially 
journalists, have access to information.
Ensure that the rights of those targeted by COVID-19-related hate speech are upheld, 
including by:
	` ensuring that allegations of hate speech that may constitute incitement to discrimination, hostility 
or violence are independently investigated and the perpetrators are held accountable, in 
accordance with international human rights law.
Ensure that all public communications by state officials, especially statements by senior 
members of government, concerning COVID-19:
	` are accessible, accurate, complete, reliable, evidence-based, transparent, available in all 
languages spoken in the population, and imparted in a timely way;
	` do not attribute blame or responsibility for the emergence or spread of the virus to any particular 
community or group;
	` promote inclusion and show members from diverse communities being impacted by the virus and 
working together to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
58  UN. 2020. Guidance Note on Addressing and Countering COVID-19 related Hate Speech  
https:/ /www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/documents/Guidance%20on%20COVID-19%20related%20Hate%20Speech.pdf
| 39
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 11.7.2 Disinformation and “fake news”
Disinformation as a concept and reality is not new. However, over the last decade, as social media has 
developed massive societal influence, its impact has grown phenomenally. Such impact can be seen 
from politics, with democratic electoral processes considered under threat, through to health, not 
least exhibited by anti-vax campaigns. The latter, again not new, are especially significant in light of the 
COVID-19 pandemic.
Popular discussion of this phenomena often conflates three concepts: disinformation, misinformation 
and mal-information. Yet these are subtly different, depending on their nature and intent. Useful 
definitions are given below:
	` Disinformation:  Information that is false and deliberately created to harm a person, social group, 
organisation or country.
	` Misinformation:  Information that is false, but not created with the intention of causing harm.
	` Mal-information:  Information that is based on reality, used to inflict harm on a person, organisation 
or country.59 
Whereas misinformation and mal-information are considerable issues, the main concern is 
disinformation due to its false and deliberate nature. Without a media that can freely investigate 
today’s issues facing citizens, untruths, that often appeal to emotions rather than rational fact, become 
embedded in a false narrative throughout society. A misinformed or, rather, disinformed citizenry 
disables any real prospect of democracy.
There is growing evidence that disinformation tends to thrive 
where human rights are constrained, where the public 
information regime is not robust and where media quality, 
diversity and independence is weak. Conversely, where 
freedom of opinion and expression is protected, civil society, 
journalists and others are able to challenge falsehoods and 
present alternative viewpoints.” 60 
At first it may seem that disinformation is an inherent element of an open society. After all, the right to 
freedom of expression extends to all kinds of information and ideas, irrespective of the truth of the 
content. Citizens have the right to hold and express ill-founded opinions and statements. Further, the 
free flow of information is central to freedom of expression. Indeed, States are obliged to protect and 
promote plural and diverse sources of information, including that from the media.
59  UNESCO. 2018. Journalism, fake news & disinformation: handbook for journalism education and training  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000265552 , p.46; and CoE. 2017. Information Disorder : Toward an interdisciplinary framework for research and 
policy making. https:/ /rm.coe.int/information-disorder-toward-an-interdisciplinary-framework-for-researc/168076277c , p.20
60   OHCHR. 2021. A/HRC/47/25  
https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2FHRC%2F47%2F25&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False
40 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThis does not mean that disinformation can never be restricted, but that any such restriction, as ever, 
requires the three-part test to be applied, maintaining a high threshold of legality, legitimacy, necessity 
and proportionality. And any existing laws on privacy and defamation and the like, protecting the rights 
of others, may also be substantive enough to handle certain elements of disinformation. Disinformation 
that is deployed to incite violence, hostility or aggression, to attack journalists, or to unjustifiably defame 
a person, can be legitimately restricted.
Important to note is that the distinctions noted above between dis-, mis- and mal-information, hinge on 
motives/intent and awareness of falsity. These are not always easy to detect or prove, hence additional 
approaches have developed. One is whether there is a coordinated dissemination by inauthentic 
actors. Another is whether indeed audiences are changing their attitudes and behaviours, or whether 
the falsehoods are less effective than first meets the eye.
Ultimately, freedom of expression and its corollaries, press freedom and access to information are 
valuable tools for countering disinformation. Free expression also serves to highlight that between 
proven truths and proven falsehoods, lies a grey area of unknowns that should not be classified in 
a binary frame, but accepted as legitimate uncertainty as science evolves, or as policy proposals 
develop in practice. These grey areas benefit from free and open discussion.
Discussion points:
	` How does disinformation affect democracy?
	` Can you think of any cases of disinformation that have had an adverse effect on democracy in 
your State?
1.7.3 Digital technology
If the State, via its legal institutions and LEAs, is to rightly support freedom of expression while also 
maintaining public order – always keeping in mind that these two duties are not necessarily in 
opposition – this balance has been impacted by rapidly evolving digital capabilities.
By the end of 2019, surveillance technology was spreading at a faster rate to a wider range of countries 
than experts had commonly understood. At least 75 out of 176 countries globally were actively using 
AI technologies for surveillance purposes. This included: smart city/safe city platforms (56 countries), 
facial recognition systems (64 countries), and smart policing (52 countries).61 
Targets of surveillance suffer interference with their rights to 
privacy and freedom of opinion and expression whether the 
effort to monitor is successful or not.”
Surveillance and human rights: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression A/HRC/41/35
61 Feldstein. S. 2019. The Global Expansion of AI Surveillance. https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2019/09/17 /global-expansion-of-ai-surveillance-pub-79847
| 41
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1Whereas the COVID-19 pandemic and widespread disinformation have provided excuses for 
increased law enforcement activities that may threaten the freedoms, surveillance itself is a 
phenomena driven by governmental aspirations, inexorable market-driven technological advances 
and strikes directly at the heart of the freedoms.
“… unlawful or arbitrary surveillance and/or interception of communications, the 
unlawful or arbitrary collection of personal data or unlawful or arbitrary hacking 
and the unlawful or arbitrary use of biometric technologies, as highly intrusive acts, 
violate or abuse the right to privacy, can interfere with other human rights, including 
the right to freedom of expression and to hold opinions without interference, and 
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and may contradict the 
tenets of a democratic society, including when undertaken extraterritorially or on a 
mass scale” 62 
Governments in all regions are actively using surveillance tools and AI systems for border control, 
criminal profiling, monitoring selected groups, and identifying individuals in crowded places. Y et many 
are at pains to do so lawfully, introducing and reviewing legislation enforcing adequate legal oversight, 
checks and balances, aligned with International Human Rights Law. It appears that:
The most important factor determining whether governments 
will exploit this technology for repressive purposes is the 
quality of their governance—is there an existing pattern of 
human rights violations? Are there strong rule of law 
traditions and independent institutions of accountability?”  63 
Social media
Social media has become a powerful tool for LEAs, while at the same time has helped enhance 
freedoms of expression and, notably in the context of public order, freedom of assembly. Although 
a continuing challenge for LEAs, this trend is best seen within the context of the reinvigoration of 
community policing around the globe, in which LEAs seek to facilitate interaction between officers 
and citizens.64 
A positive side of social media is shown through the use of texts, posts, images and videos, via various 
platforms to allow LEAs to engage with local communities by sharing updates and receiving feedback 
about local concerns. This will be explored more in Module 3.
In a positive sense, social media can also be a valuable intelligence asset and a source of masses 
of usable data for policing and security purposes, as will be examined in Module 7 . Such social 
media intelligence (SOCMINT) is, by design, public. While covert interception of communications 
should be subject to legal oversight, the public nature of social media does not render it free from 
the need to be protected from abuse, either by the public themselves or by government and its law 
enforcement agencies.
62 OHCHR. 2019. A/74/53/Add.1. https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2F7 4%2F53&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False
63 Feldstein, S. 2019. The Global Expansion of AI Surveillance. https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/files/WP-Feldstein-AISurveillance_final1.pdf  p.10
64  Bullock, K. 2017. The Police Use of Social Media: Transformation or Normalisation? https:/ /www.cambridge.org/core/journals/social-policy-and-society/article/
police-use-of-social-media-transformation-or-normalisation/19E5C6727038F01129B51CE4287D0FFB
42 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsIn open states, all communications sent or received by government organizations, including LEAs, 
should be subject to open scrutiny, mostly via request. For the sake of transparency, LEAs should 
develop plans for collecting and archiving all official messages on social media channels. Such records 
may also be required for internal investigations, case logs and in response to potential legal actions, as 
covered in Module 7 .
Social media monitoring can be used by LEAs to legitimately monitor criminal activities. However, 
this is not free from risk and there are concerns as to its actual effectiveness in prosecutions. Such 
monitoring may threaten privacy and free expression, increase disproportionate surveillance of certain 
communities, and can lead to arrests of people on the basis of misinterpreted posts and associations.65  
T o mitigate the danger of misuse and abuse, and in the interests of police accountability, LEAs should 
take proactive steps to make public those policies governing their use of social media in this regard.
Discussion points:
	` Does your police or security agency conduct social media monitoring?
	` If so, what safeguards are in place to do so while also protecting the right to freedom of 
expression?
	` If so, are the policies on its use available to the public?
Artificial Intelligence and data
Way beyond the mere posts, texts, images and videos that flood the internet, pure digital data generated 
by every interaction every digital user makes with a device provides a massive amount of information, 
often called generically ‘big data’. Once considered too complex and demanding a task for real-time, 
dynamic or even longer term intelligence, over the last decade, the ability of LEAs to manage and 
analyse such data have increased significantly.66 
Smart or predictive policing aims to gather immense quantities of data from multiple sources – social 
media feeds, geographic location, arrest records, types of crimes, biometric data – for algorithmic 
analysis in order to prevent crime, rapidly respond to criminal acts and make predictions about future 
criminal activity.
However, the gathering, storage and management of such huge datasets present ethical issues around 
not only privacy but also freedom of expression.67  Where Article 19 of the ICCPR states that “Everyone 
shall have the right to hold opinions without interference”, the very fact that access to an individual’s 
data may so easily allow such interference, either by human or algorithmic mechanisms, threatens the 
basis of freedom of expression. The threat, real or perceived, that an individual or group can be tracked 
or monitored by public authorities, notably LEAs, dampens the willingness of that individual or group 
to ‘seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds’ as defined by Article 19 of the ICCPR.
Increasingly governments are adopting regulations regarding the use of data, such as the European 
Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). But these tend to be focussed on corporate use 
of data and the extent that protections afforded under these regulations extend to LEAs is less clear.
65  For a summary of studies that have dealt with the topic of how social media is used in criminal intelligence work, focusing on the impact of social media and the 
challenges and opportunities associated with it, see Fortin.F., Delle Donne J., Knop J. 2020. The Use of Social Media in Intelligence and Its Impact on Police Work; in 
Nolan J.J., Crispino F., Parsons T. (eds) in Policing in an Age of Reform. https:/ /link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-030-56765-1_13  , pp. 213-231
66  For more information on AI’s application and impact on the rule of law, see an online course for judicial actors, launched by UNESCO and The Future Society, with 
the support of Cetic.br|NIC.br, the National Judicial College, and IEEE SA. https:/ /www.judges.org/ai_and_law/english/  
67 See UNESCO. 2021. Recommendation on the ethics of artificial intelligence. https:/ /en.unesco.org/artificial-intelligence/ethics#recommendation
| 43
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1Discussion points:
	` As a law-abiding individual, do you take care to protect your personal data?
	` If so, why do you feel it is important to do so?
Facial Recognition T echnology
A significant potential source of such data is considered to be facial recognition technology (FRT), 
which can in certain circumstances enable real-time identification of individuals via cameras in 
monitored locations. It is a technology that is considered highly effective in public order settings, as 
can be seen by regular deployments in mass demonstrations across the world. While static cameras 
employing FRT can imply an indirect threat to individuals’ rights through mass monitoring, mobile FRT 
capabilities present a direct threat, especially when used at public gatherings.
Over the last few years, across the globe, people attending rallies have taken to wearing masks or 
camouflage make-up and using light effects to confuse FRT systems. In doing so they may continue 
to make their voices and opinions heard “but their only ‘opt-out’ option is to not turn up” 68  – a result 
which strikes at the heart of the freedoms of expression, assembly and participation. This is borne 
out by surveys of citizens stating that they would no longer attend events if such technology was 
being employed.69 
However, many citizens can appreciate the benefits of FRT in enhancing security for public benefit. 
Legitimate and effective use of FRT can be seen in identity checking at border controls, finding the 
identity of A TM fraud criminals, uncovering the identity of law-breaking rioters, actively looking 
for terrorists in public spaces, to fight child abuse and find missing persons. But many remain 
uncomfortable with LEAs using FRT, concerned that it infringes on privacy, normalises surveillance, 
and may not necessarily be used ethically.
Further, the technology is far from perfect, with significantly varying success rates depending on many 
variables, not least the weather. But regardless, the fact that FRT is an arbitrary, mass surveillance 
system, optimised for use in public order situations, requires that its use should be subject to high 
thresholds with regards to the three-part test concerning limitations and restrictions.70 
Civil society experts indicate that facial recognition technologies may negatively 
impact on the willingness of protesters to engage in activism. Hence, deploying 
facial recognition technology during demonstrations would need to meet an even 
higher threshold of necessity and proportionality than in other public spaces.71 
Further, a key element of employment of FRT is risk mitigation. Considerations of respect for human 
rights, necessary and proportional use, transparency, human oversight and accountability, system 
performance, training of facial examiners, use of databases and data integrity are vital to ensure the 
use of FRT does not exceed legal parameters and threaten freedom of expression. A self-assessment 
questionnaire covering these elements has been developed by INTERPOL, the UN Interregional Crime 
and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI), the Netherlands Police and the World Economic Forum.72  
68 Nature. 2020. Resisting the rise of facial recognition. https:/ /www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03188-2
69  London Policing Ethics Panel (LPEP). 2019. Final report on live facial recognition
70  For further details on implications of digital technology see OHCHR. 2021. The right to privacy in the digital age: Report (2021).  
https:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/DigitalAge/Pages/cfi-digital-age.aspx
71  FRA. 2019. Facial recognition technology: fundamental rights considerations in the context of law enforcement  
https:/ /fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra_uploads/fra-2019-facial-recognition-technology-focus-paper.pdf , p.30
72  World Economic Forum. 2021. A Policy Framework for Responsible Limits on Facial Recognition  
https:/ /www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF _A_Policy_Framework_for_Responsible_Limits_on_Facial_Recognition_2021.pdf , p. 20-24
44 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsIn relation to protests, national authorities should consider appointing an ombudsman with 
responsibility for the treatment by police and other security forces of the press during protests73  – for 
instance, when deploying the use of FRT. This will ensure the appointment of an official to monitor the 
actions of LEAs, in accordance with their duties to protect human rights and personal data.
Case Study – Serbia, 2019
At the beginning of 2019, the Minister of Interior (MoI) and the Director of Police announced 
the placement of 1000 cameras on 800 locations in Belgrade. The public was informed 
that these surveillance cameras will have facial and license plate recognition software. Civil 
society organisations requested that MoI provide its impact assessment on personal data 
protection that is required to be developed under the state’s Personal Data Protection Law. 
Claiming confidentiality issues, the MoI did not provide this publicly but did eventually provide 
its Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) to the national Commissioner on Personal Data 
Protection. In late 2019, the Commissioner is reported to have concluded that the DPIA does 
not meet the formal or material conditions required by the Personal Data Protection Law.74 
Other technologies and mechanisms
Body Worn Cameras (BWCs) are largely seen as a concrete way to enhance police transparency and 
accountability. Their effectiveness in ensuring officers’ good conduct is however, nuanced, and must 
be assessed in the context of the national policies governing their use and oversight.75 
While social media monitoring, big data and FRT are the most common concerns, other technology 
and mechanisms also challenge the freedoms we are concerned with here. For instance, IMSI 
catchers (devices that collect International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) and International Mobile 
Equipment Identity (IMEI) data that are unique to each mobile phone and SIM card) can ultimately allow 
interference with even interception of private mobile phone traffic in large crowds. The deployment 
of drones, equipped with the above-mentioned mass and arbitrary surveillance technology further 
allows the, intended or otherwise, degradation of the right to freedoms of expression, assembly and 
participation. And then there is the normally highly disproportionate option of specific web platform, 
even widespread internet service, shutdown, which, given the nature of modern communications, is a 
serious encroachment of these freedoms.
Discussion points:
	` Does your police or security agency have access to the technologies discussed above?
	` If so, what considerations are there regarding their use?
73  UNESCO. 2020. Safety of journalists covering protests : preserving freedom of the press during times of turmoil.  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206 , p.16
74  European Digital Rights (EDRi). 2019. Serbia: Unlawful facial recognition video surveillance in Belgrade  
https:/ /edri.org/our-work/serbia-unlawful-facial-recognition-video-surveillance-in-belgrade/
75  For further comment on BWCs see Engineering & Technology. 2020.  Investigation into body cameras finds nagging challenges for UK police  
https:/ /eandt.theiet.org/content/articles/2020/03/investigation-on-body-worn-cameras/ , and ACLU. 2015. Police Body-Mounted Cameras: With Right Policies 
in Place, a Win for All. https:/ /www.aclu.org/other/police-body-mounted-cameras-right-policies-place-win-all
| 45
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 1Whenever the police seek to use technology in pursuit of a legitimate aim, the 
key question arises as to whether the degree of intrusion which is caused to 
the fundamental freedoms of citizens by the police surveillance conduct using 
surveillance algorithms (biometric or otherwise) is necessary in a democratic 
society when considered alongside the legality and proportionality of their 
endeavours and intent. The type of equipment/ technology/modality which they 
choose to use to that end (e.g. LFR [Live Facial Recognition], ANPR [Automatic 
Number Plate Recognition], thermal imaging, gait analysis, movement sensors 
etc), the manner in which such technological means are deployed, (such as using 
static cameras at various locations, used with body worn cameras or other mobile 
means), and whether such technology is used overtly alongside or networked with 
other surveillance technologies, are all factors which may significantly influence the 
depth of intrusion caused by police conduct upon citizen’s rights.76 
Surveillance of the LEAs
Police and security forces do not have a monopoly on surveillance technology, especially given that 
the industry is largely driven by market forces aimed at mass consumers. This means that officers 
themselves are increasingly subject to surveillance, or at least scrutiny. This comes about due to 
the ubiquitous nature of mobile phone technology but is also evident in more sophisticated use of 
advanced digital technology by citizens. At the lower end of this advanced spectrum is the simple use 
of coordinated filming and deployment of camera-equipped drones, through to apps using proprietary 
AI to scan emergency channels or crowdsource information of police activity to subsequent use 
of commercial FRT to identify plain clothes police and security officers and expose their identities 
online.77  Thus the use of surveillance technology, AI and FRT is a double-edged sword. 
Government reactions in the face of such use of technology by the public, notably during assemblies, 
has rightly raised concerns of civil rights movements.78  Due to the nature of the job, police and 
security officers are public-facing. However, when not on duty, they have the same rights to privacy, 
as individuals, as any member of the public. Further, it is not the photographing or videoing of police 
or security forces that should be an issue but the subsequent use of such material, as should be case 
for any citizen. With some exceptions, such as minors, taking photographs and video of anything and 
anyone, including police and other government officials carrying out their duties, plainly visible in public 
spaces is considered a democratic right.
76  Surveillance Camera Commissioner. 2020. Facing the Camera: Good Practice and Guidance for the Police Use of Overt Surveillance Camera Systems Incorpo -
rating Facial Recognition T echnology. https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/940386/6.7024_
SCC_Facial_recognition_report_v3_WEB.pdf , p.12
77  For further background see The Guardian. 20/09/19. Hong Kong protests: tech war opens up with doxxing of protesters and police  
https:/ /www.theguardian.com/world/2019/sep/20/hong-kong-protests-tech-war-opens-up-with-doxxing-of-protesters-and-police , and Vox. 12/06/20. How 
protesters are turning the tables on police surveillance. https:/ /www.vox.com/recode/2020/6/12/21284113/police-protests-surveillance-instagram-washington-dc
78  See France24. 21/11/20 French bill banning images of police sparks concern over media freedom, civil rights  
https:/ /www.france24.com/en/france/20201121-new-french-law-banning-images-of-police-sparks-civil-rights-concerns-protests
46 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsCase Study – USA, 2017
An unarmed man was video recording a police station on a public sidewalk when two officers 
approached him from their patrol car and asked him for identification. The man refused 
to produce his identification and continued filming the police station. The officers then 
handcuffed him, took his camera, and put him in the back of the patrol car. He asked to see 
a supervisor and a more senior officer arrived on the scene. The man told the police officers 
they needed to release him, and after a lecture from the senior officer, he was released and 
his camera returned to him. The man filed a lawsuit against the three officers, claiming his right 
to freedom of expression had been breached and he had been subject to an unreasonable 
detention and seizure.
The Court looked at the claim of restriction of freedom of expression and whether a right to 
record police activity was “clearly established”. In other words, they considered would every 
reasonable police officer know he was violating the law by stopping someone from filming the 
police? The Court didn’t think so. However, while this claim was therefore dismissed, it was 
made clear that holding government officers accountable for their actions was an important 
principle of freedom of speech and debate and that the public does have a right to film the 
police subject to reasonable restrictions. 
However, the Court found that the arrest itself was a violation because the two arresting officers 
lacked probable cause to take the man into custody. The Court did dismiss the claim against 
the more senior officer, finding that he was not involved in the arrest and acted reasonably on 
his arrival.79 
79 Taken from Columbia Global Freedom of Expression website. For further on this case see  
https:/ /globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/cases/turner-v-driver/
| 47
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 11.8 Activities
The following activities enable trainers to: 
	` Determine whether participants’ understanding of the limits on restrictions to freedom of 
expression has increased since the start of the module.
	` Assess whether participants now have a greater understanding of the concepts of freedom of 
expression.
	` Encourage participants to examine their role in protecting the right to freedom of expression.
	` Assess whether the participants understand the three-part test.
1.8. 1 Activity – Limits and Restrictions
Individuals or small groups may conduct the activity. Individuals may be asked to 
respond or a show of hands may be requested regarding each point. If using groups, 
these groups may discuss and select the answers, with one group member presenting 
the results of their group. Once the individual responses are made or group 
presentations are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants 
on their conclusions.
Apart from exceptional circumstances, generally speaking, which of the instances below are examples 
of the types of State actions that may limit the right to freedom of expression. 
	` A law passed by a legislative body prescribing compulsory membership to an association for the 
practice of journalism. 
	` A criminal conviction for defamation against a journalist who wrote an article alleging corruption 
by a public official. 
	` A decision issued by a government censorship organ banning the screening of a film deemed 
offensive to a religion. 
	` A decision made by the military criminal justice authorities preventing the publication of a book 
authored by a military retiree through such measures as the confiscation of hard or soft copies 
from the printing house. 
	` A decision to deprive the owner of a media company of citizenship for having taken a critical 
stance on the government. 
	` A decision not to renew the license or concession granted to a broadcaster or TV channel in 
retaliation for their critical stance. 
	` In a criminal conviction, the imposition of an accessory penalty consisting of the prohibition to own 
or work in a media company.
48 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents	` Conducting a prior consultation with an indigenous community without providing sufficient 
information about the consultation. 
	` The refusal of military authorities to provide a judicial research team with information on a case of 
forced disappearance. 
	` The criminal conviction of public officials or private citizens for expressing deemed offensive or 
defamatory opinions of public officials or State institutions. 
Trainer notes:  All of the above may be considered cases of limiting freedom of expression. For more 
detailed analysis of the reasoning, refer to Global T oolkit for Judicial Actors – Module 2. “Legitimate 
Restrictions on the Exercise of Freedom of Expression”. 
1.8.2 Activity – Doctrinal references
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions, with 
one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group presentations 
are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants on their 
conclusions.
All LEAs will have doctrine, defining their principles, ethos, standards, purpose and value. Seek out the 
main doctrine of the participants’ police or security force and ask them to:
1. Identify any elements which refer to the following:
	` Public service
	` Accountability
	` Human rights
	` T ransparency
2.  Discuss if, where and how the right to freedom of expression and its associated freedoms are 
relevant to these elements of doctrine.
3.  If freedom of expression and/or its associated freedoms are specifically mentioned in the doctrine, 
consider the following:
 a. Is protection of these freedoms explicit or not?
  b. If not, is such protection implied? How?
| 49
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 150 |
Module 1  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsModule 2:
The media, its freedom  
and safety of journalists
T able of Contents
Key points | 53
2.1 Introduction | 54
2.1.1 Freedom of the media | 55
2.2 Who is a journalist?  | 57
2.2.1  A journalist’s needs  | 58
2.3 Why is the safety of journalists important? | 60
2.3.1 The increasing risk | 60
2.3.2 Online | 62
2.3.3 T argeting of women journalists | 63
2.4 Protection of journalists | 66
2.4.1 State obligations | 66
2.4.2 Early warning mechanisms | 68
2.4.3 Police Protection examples | 69
2.5 Activities | 73
2.5.1 Activity – Online threats | 73
2.5.2 Activity – Safety of journalists | 7 4
2.5.3 Activity – Role play: Journalists | 7 4
| 51
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2Module aims
 `T o provide an overview of the 
fundamentals of a free press and its role  
in fostering the realisation of human rights 
and sustainable development.
 `T o outline the multitude of threats faced by 
journalists and high-level calls to provide 
mechanisms to protect the media.
 `T o understand the role of the security 
services in protecting journalists and 
cooperating to improve their safety.
 `T o identify some of the national and 
international organisations both 
governmental and non-governmental that 
work to improve journalists’ safety.
52 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsKey points
	`A free, diverse and independent media landscape is an essential component of 
any democratic society. 
	`Freedom of the media should be protected, and journalists are civilians who merit 
protection and, unless breaking a law aligned with International Human Rights 
Standards, should not be hindered in their activities.
	`Journalists and media workers across the globe face mounting personal risk of 
death, injury, harassment, arbitrary detention, censorship, and disproportionate 
restrictions. The very nature of their job can put them in harm’s way.
	` The increase in global connectivity has meant that journalists now face a rising 
number of online threats, harassment, abuse, hate speech and trolling.
	` Sexual violence, or the threat of it, both online and offline, has been specifically 
used to silence women journalists. 
	` International law recognises the hazardous nature of the journalism profession 
and requires that states (and thereby LEAs) take necessary measures to reduce 
those hazards, improve the safety of journalists and, if necessary, even physically 
protect journalists.
	` Several states have adopted measures to enable LEAs to react to warnings of 
threats to journalists, liaise with media organizations to mitigate those threats, and, 
if necessary, provide physical protection to threatened journalists.
| 53
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 22. 1 Introduction
That they are attacked and killed for their work is 
paradoxically a sign that media do matter, and that freedom 
of information and expression is a highly important 
component of civilized society.”
Barry James, Senior reporter and editor80 
In mentioning the media, the traditional journalist is often brought to mind. In referring to media freedom, 
the rights of the traditional news outlet are often what is really considered. However, in its broadest 
sense, today’s media is so much more than the journalist and their news outlets. It also includes a 
wide array of actors, from the individual as “citizen journalist” through to institutions and businesses 
as producers of information and influence. Yet, the traditional media still has considerable sway and a 
marked role to play in the contemporary information environment.
Free, diverse and independent media are an essential component of any democratic society. Citizens 
rely on journalists to report the news accurately, and those journalists are expected to be factual in their 
reporting. The wider expectations of such media are:
	` T o circulate information of public interest;
	` T o connect citizens to government and vice versa;
	` T o monitor the routine work of the main institutions of society; 
	` T o be available to help at times of crisis or emergency.81  
In order to meet these expectations, journalists should ask critical questions, examine various (often 
contrary) views, expose untruths, relentlessly check facts, avoid their own biases, and present their 
findings in a manner amenable to their audience – this is their job, their role in providing a public good. 
And all the while they should consider some degree of ethical restraint if their reporting may affect the 
rights of others.
That is the aspiration of journalism. However, the real world throws obstacles in the journalist’s way. 
One is “media capture”82  whereby media owners compromise journalistic standards or truth-telling 
and fairness, in favour of political or economic interests. Another is that working in a highly competitive, 
dynamic and information-saturated environment, journalists often face considerable pressure to 
provide sensational stories. The news cycle moves quickly, preventing proper and detailed scrutiny 
of facts. Media outlets are mostly commercial enterprises that ultimately rely on maximising numbers 
of readers, listeners or viewers, frequently pandering to the audience’s whims, often political, in order 
to do so. The rise of digital and social media, allowing anyone to contribute to the news agenda, has 
diminished the average journalist’s employment prospects.
80  UNESCO. 2007. Press Freedom: Safety of Journalists and Impunity. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000156773 , p.7
81 McQuail, D. 2013. What is Journalism? How is it Linked to Society? Journalism and Society. London, Sage
82 UNESCO. Reporting facts: free from fear or favour. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000375061 , p.12
54 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsYet, it is these challenging conditions of media capture and commercialised competition that actually 
make the aspirations of journalism, and those journalists that work towards them, more important than 
ever. Citizens now have access to an abundance, even overload, of information, and are increasingly 
subject to misinformation or disinformation, or are distracted by hyped-up opinions, entertainment or 
by commercial interests, to the extent that their abilities to navigate their societies and the wider world 
has become more difficult. Journalists have an incentive to meet professional standards in order to 
serve the public with the distinctive value of accurate news and information analysis. 
2. 1. 1 Freedom of the media
Freedom of the media matters. It allows citizens to have access to fact-based knowledge of the world 
around them and on issues that affect them. It allows citizens to make informed, independent choices, 
not least about politics and those they elect. And, it holds those in power accountable, shining light 
upon practices that are often hidden by those who benefit from their secrecy. In this role, the media 
acts as a ‘watchdog’, pointing out threats to good governance, public safety and fairness. If the media is 
not free but instead beholden to power, it simply serves as an extension of that power – a condition that 
damages pluralism and accountability of decision makers. 
Societies in which professional journalists are able to report without hindrance or fear are safer, 
more stable and more inclusive. Institutions are more accountable and transparent, and power and 
resources are distributed more equitably.
According to the major tracking indices, media freedom and freedom of expression have been on the 
decline in many parts of the world since 2012. Between 2015 and 2020, 27 countries saw freedom 
of expression decline substantially, compared with 25 countries from 2010 to 2015, and just 10 from 
2005 to 2010.83  And since the beginning of 2020, as the COVID-19 pandemic grew, media freedom 
has been increasingly threatened.
The 2021 Press Freedom Index produced by Reporters Without Borders, which evaluates the press 
freedom situation in 180 countries and territories annually, showed that:
journalism, which is arguably the best vaccine against the 
virus of disinformation, is totally blocked or seriously 
impeded in 73 countries and constrained in 59 others, which 
together represent 73% of the countries evaluated. These 
countries are classified as having “very bad,” “bad” or 
“problematic” environments for press freedom.”84 
83  UNESCO. 2022. Journalism is a public good: World trends in freedom of expression and media development. Global report 2021/2022  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380618
84  RSF. 2021. 2021 World Press Freedom Index: Journalism, the vaccine against disinformation, blocked in more than 130 countries  
https:/ /rsf.org/en/2021-world-press-freedom-index-journalism-vaccine-against-disinformation-blocked-more-130-countries
| 55
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2Arrests & Criminal 
Investigations   32.81%
Censorship on Media 
or Journalists  14.83%
Verbal or Physical Attacks 
Against Journalists  34.86%Restrictions on Access 
to Information  14.20%Fake News 
Regulations  3.31%
Figure 2.1  Nature of Media Freedom Violations85 
Discussion points:
	` Have you been aware of violations of media freedom, in your country or elsewhere?
	`  What was the nature of the violations?
As can be seen, violations of media freedom normally refer to arrests of, or attacks on, journalists.
While freedom of the media is to be embraced and encouraged, there are, as in the case of freedom of 
expression, limits authorized by International Human Rights Law, and the media is subject to specific 
laws and regulations. Regulation can take several forms but largely conforms to one of the below:
	` Self-regulation : a system of self-regulation where news media (collectively) draw up their own 
regulations and take full responsibility for monitoring compliance with those regulations.
	` Statutory regulation : the state sets the relevant legislative or regulatory rules and monitors and 
enforces compliance. 
	` Co-regulation  is a hybrid form where self-regulation ultimately is backstopped by statutory 
regulation.
There have been many examinations, reports and declarations from various international bodies 
concerned with international law and media regulation.86 
85  IPI. 2021. WPFD 2021: Attacks on press freedom growing bolder amid rising authoritarianism  
https:/ /ipi.media/wpfd-2021-attacks-on-press-freedom-growing-bolder-amid-rising-authoritarianism/
86  For a comprehensive listing up until 2013 see OSCE. 2013. Joint Declarations of the representatives of intergovernmental bodies to protect free media and  
expression https://www.osce.org/files/f/documents/5/5/99558.pdf
56 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents2.2 Who is a journalist? 
Gone are the days when journalists were readily identifiable. Journalists are defined according to their 
functions and the nature of their activity. According to the UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion 
and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression,
[Journalists] are individuals who observe and describe 
events, document and analyse events, statements, policies, 
and any propositions that can affect society, with the 
purpose of systematizing such information and gathering 
of facts and analyses to inform sectors of society or society 
as a whole. Such a definition of journalists includes all 
media workers and support staff, as well as community 
media workers and so-called “citizen journalists” when they 
momentarily play that role.” 87 
In General Comment No. 34, the UN Human Rights Committee also adopted a functional definition 
of the profession of journalist. Under international law, not every scheme of licensing or registering 
journalists is legitimate. The Committee has clarified as follows:
Journalism is a function shared by a wide range of actors, 
including professional full-time reporters and analysts, as 
well as bloggers and others who engage in forms of self-
publication in print, on the Internet or elsewhere, and 
general State systems of registration or licensing of 
journalists are incompatible with paragraph 3 [of Article 19 
of the ICCPR].”  88 
87 OHCHR. 2012. A/HRC/20/17. https:/ /ap.ohchr.org/documents/dpage_e.aspx?si=A/HRC/20/17 /Add.1 , para. 4
88 OHCHR. 2011. CCPR/C/GC/34. https:/ /www.refworld.org/docid/4ed34b562.html , para. 44
| 57
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2Accreditation schemes (often with visible identification designed to grant access or protect safety) 
are not seen to be an undue burden on the practice of journalism so long as they are fairly applied. 
These schemes are often established by a national journalist union or other public bodies. But, 
many ‘citizen journalists’ cannot be identified this way. Regardless, journalists (whether traditional 
or citizen journalists) are civilians and, unless breaking a law that is in line with International Human 
Rights Standards, should be protected for their exercise of freedom of expression, not be hindered 
in their activities.
In many democracies, professional journalists, primarily meaning those who earn money from it, form 
an industry that establishes and recognises professional standards or codes of ethics.
Discussion points:
	` What is your opinion of the journalists you know?
	`  Are they all the same?
	`  What do you consider to be their role in society?
2.2. 1 A journalist’s needs
Organised journalism industries recognise the need for common standards. As such, many countries 
around the world, and international journalism bodies, promote their own codes of journalistic ethics or 
standards of conduct. Generally, they concern the primacy of truth, impartiality, balance, facts versus 
comments or opinion, and accuracy of reporting.89 
Consequently, a journalist’s greatest need is access to an event – whether that be a court case, 
government press conference or a riot – so that they can observe clearly, collate the facts and develop 
an understanding of the relevant issues. Equally, imagery is vital to evidence events, to give the audience 
the opportunity to form their own view of what is happening, and to attract readers or viewers.
In addition to visibility of incidents or public occasions, the journalist relies on access to credible 
sources. Investigative reporting, in particular, often requires access to sensitive material or sources 
so that the journalist can go beyond the easily visible to find the truth that may lie beneath a facade 
of fabrication. It is a long-standing tradition, a matter of duty, that reporters protect such sources to 
ensure they are not penalized or made to suffer for coming forward and revealing information that has 
been kept hidden – often by the powerful or people engaged in criminal activities.
While protecting the anonymity of such sources, the very nature of journalism means that the reporter 
must go public with the information, thus jeopardising themselves. Many media workers across the 
world take huge risks to expose criminality, corruption or poor governance. They rely on strong law 
enforcement to provide a secure environment to operate in – whether that be a cordoned area at a 
protest (e.g., media perimeter) or advice on dangerous locations – as well as a judicial system that 
prosecutes those who threaten them with violence.
In an era when misinformation and disinformation abound, credible sources are paramount. And the 
security services, whether police or military should be a reliable, trustworthy source of accurate and 
unbiased information (see Module 3.)
89 See IFJ. 2019. Global Charter of Ethics for Journalists. https:/ /www.ifj.org/who/rules-and-policy/global-charter-of-ethics-for-journalists.html
58 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThe journalist is constantly in search of newsworthy information, facts that will inform, educate and 
fascinate their audience. In this era of fast flowing, 24-hour news, that information must not only be 
fresh and interesting but also swiftly delivered so that media can keep up with the public’s interest for 
new stories or constant updates on unfolding events.
In an era of lightning-fast digital communications, journalists face a heavy logistical and financial 
burden. They require access to sufficient internet connection and power to be able to keep up with 
unfolding events elsewhere as well as ensure that their own stories can be quickly transmitted from 
any location at any time. Further, as newspaper sales continue to decline, the digital ecosystem has 
seen advertising revenues increasingly shift towards large Internet corporations and away from news 
outlets.90 
90   UNESCO. 2021. Journalism is a public good: world trends in freedom of expression and media development: global report 2021/2022; Highlights  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379826 , pp. 8-9
| 59
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 22.3 Why is the safety of journalists important?
A free, uncensored, and independent press is the cornerstone of a thriving and stable society, where 
people can make informed, responsible choices rather than rely on fabrications or speculation. 
Notwithstanding ethical standards in practice, it is proven on balance to convey life-saving information 
and promote tolerance, inter-community collaboration, and respect for human rights.
The media is vital to ensuring transparency in public authorities, not only to hold them to account 
and ensure they make good on their promises, but also to counter misinformation and expose 
corruption.91 
The press provides a two-way channel in which the authorities can be seen and heard by the 
population, which can communicate back its opinions, particularly in the digital age. Equally, a public 
that feels its security services are transparent and held accountable is more likely to treat them with 
respect and abide by the rule of law.
In an era when misinformation and disinformation is on the rise, with people (maliciously or innocently) 
spreading rumours, falsehoods, polarised opinions and even calls to violence, the role of the media 
is crucial in countering disinformation or misinformation that could prove highly detrimental, even 
dangerous, to the country and its people.92 
2.3. 1 The increasing risk
On average, every five days a journalist is killed for bringing 
information to the public. Attacks on media professionals 
are often perpetrated in non-conflict situations by organised 
crime groups, militia, security personnel, and even local 
police, making local journalists among the most vulnerable. 
These attacks include murder, abductions, harassment, 
intimidation, illegal arrest, and arbitrary detention”  
UNESCO Brief on the Safety of Journalists93 
91   The United Nations General Assembly Special Session on Corruption adopted a Declaration to implement measures to prevent corruption and strengthen 
international cooperation, notably by enhancing the safety of journalists and promote public access to information. In the Declaration, signatory UN Member States 
committed to “provide a safe and adequate environment to journalists, and (…) investigate, prosecute and punish threats and acts of violence, falling within [their] 
jurisdiction, committed against them”. Available at: https:/ /undocs.org/A/RES/S-32/1  
92  Center for Democracy and Governance. 1999. The Role of Media in Democracy: A Strategic Approach  
https:/ /www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2496/200sbc.pdf , p3. UNESCO. 2020. Balancing Act: Countering Disinformation while Respecting 
Freedom of Expression. https:/ /www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/working-groups/FoE_Disinfo_Report.pdf
93 UNESCO. Safety of Journalists. https:/ /en.unesco.org/themes/safety-journalists  (accessed August 2022)
60 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsDespite their value to society, journalists and media workers across the globe face mounting 
personal risk of death, injury, harassment, arbitrary detention, censorship, and other disproportionate 
restrictions. Unlike with most civilians, the nature of a journalist’s job can put him or her in harm’s way. In 
that sense, journalists are in a similar position to LEA officers, but without the same degree of physical 
protection. And, unfortunately journalists are at times subject to harm from LEA officers as well, notably 
during protests (see Module 5).
Since 1993 just over 1500 journalists have been reported as killed globally, according to data from 
UNESCO’s Observatory of Killed Journalists.94  The trend appears that such killings are proportionately 
occurring more in countries not experiencing armed conflict.
2016100–– Percentage of journalists killed in countries experiencing armed conflict–– Percentage of journalists killed in countries not experiencing armed conflict%
80
60
50%
50%61% 61%
39% 39%40
20
0
2020 2019 2018 201745% 45%55% 55%
Figure 2.2  Proportions of journalists killed95  
From January 2015 to August 2021, UNESCO registered attacks against journalists in connection 
with the coverage of protests, demonstrations, and riots in at least 153 countries worldwide.96  In some 
cases, the attacks were directed against one journalist; in other instances, multiple journalists were 
targeted. Since 2015, at least 13 journalists have been killed while covering protests.97  
In 2021, 294 journalists were imprisoned and 64 disappeared. While some were caught in the crossfire 
in wars, far more were murdered for their reporting.98 
RSF have stated that “of all the journalists killed in connection with their work in 2020, 84% were 
knowingly targeted and deliberately murdered”. The most dangerous stories to cover were cases 
of local corruption or misuse of public funds as well as investigations into the activities of organised 
crime.99  
94 Data as of 1 August 2022. Data available at: https:/ /en.unesco.org/themes/safety-journalists/observatory
95 UNESCO. 2021. Threats that Silence: Trends in the Safety of Journalists. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379589?7 , p. 10
96  Data compiled from UNESCO. 2020. Safety of journalists covering protests : preserving freedom of the press during times of turmoil  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206 ; UNESCO. 2021. Safety of journalists covering protests: preserving freedom of the press during times 
of turmoil; Regional highlights, July – December 2020. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000377346  and UNESCO 2022. Journalism is a public good: 
World trends in freedom of expression and media development; Global report 2021/2022. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380618.locale=en
97 UNESCO. 2021. Threats that Silence: Trends in the Safety of Journalists. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379589?7 , p. 18
98 Data as of 1 December 2021. Data available at: https://cpj.org
99  RSF. 2020. RSF’s 2020 Round-up: 50 journalists killed, two-thirds in countries “at peace”  
https:/ /rsf.org/en/news/rsfs-2020-round-50-journalists-killed-two-thirds-countries-peace
| 61
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2In many other cases, journalists are injured or disappeared. Many face death threats or severe 
harassment by criminal elements and even members of security services. Still more face arbitrary 
detention, either on the grounds of reporting deemed detrimental to the government, or as “false 
criminal charges”, as reported by media organisations.
Harassment and arbitrary detention by the security services only serve to undermine democracy 
and lead to suspicion and distrust from both the media and the wider population. RSF and the 
Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) issue almost daily condemnations of media workers 
being arrested, and organisations being forced into closure.
2.3.2 Online
According to UNESCO data, journalists face a rising number of online threats, harassment, racist 
abuse, hate speech and trolling.100  The relatively anonymous nature and speed of communication 
on the internet makes the media particularly vulnerable to those who choose to react to news they 
disagree with by making personal, vindictive statements that go beyond criticism into intimidation, 
often over protracted periods of time.
Some of the methods used to silence journalists include: 
	` Spreading false reports and videos, publishing personal information (“doxxing”) and defamation.
	` Blocking websites, platforms, and apps.
	` Disseminating fake or maliciously edited content or fake memes to discredit journalists personally 
or their stories and conducting targeted harassment campaigns.
	` T ools for intercepting phone calls and e-mails.
	` Using spyware capable of extracting files from a targeted device, intercepting emails, and instant 
messages, and activating a device’s webcam or microphone.
Journalists have become vocal about the abuse they are facing, with many editors speaking out on the 
issue. Many news organisations now offer mental health care, counselling and peer to peer support, 
alongside legal counsel and guidelines on protection against online harassment. For instance, the 
global news company, The New York Times, has a dedicated team that deals with online threats and 
abuse, offering security training and mental health resources for media workers.101 
Discussion points:
	` Why do you think online attacks are increasing?
	`  Do you think online attacks are as harmful as abuse in person? What should be the role  
of LEA in this matter?
	`  As LEA what should be done to counter the problem?
100   UNESCO. 2020. Safety of journalists covering protests : preserving freedom of the press during times of turmoil  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206 . UNESCO 2021. The Chilling: global trends in online violence against women journalists; research 
discussion paper. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000377223
101   Benton / Niemanlab. 2022. The New York Times would really like its reporters to stop scrolling and get off Twitter (at least once in a while)  
https:/ /www.niemanlab.org/2022/04/the-new-york-times-would-really-like-its-reporters-to-stop-scrolling-and-get-off-twitter-at-least-once-in-a-while/
62 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents2.3.3 T argeting of women journalists
Although representing a relatively low percentage of media professionals killed globally each year, the 
proportion of women journalists murdered rose from 4% in 2012 to 14 % in 2017 .102  UNESCO reports 
that between 2017 and 2021, a total of 32 women journalists were killed worldwide.103  
A number of recent UN resolutions and reports demonstrate a growing recognition by the international 
community of the need to tackle the specific risks women journalists face both offline and online.104  
They often faced gender-based violence and the threat of sexual assault and rape. 
The 2013 UN Resolution (A/RES/68/163) on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity 
acknowledged the specific risks faced by women journalists and the importance of taking a gender 
sensitive approach when considering measures to address the safety of journalists.105 
Studies have shown that female journalists are targeted online significantly more than their male 
colleagues. According to UNESCO, ‘[t]his violence has many forms, including sending or publishing 
misogynistic or demeaning comments, jokes and memes, as well as sexually explicit or even 
pornographic content.’ 106  Further, the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women has 
stated that the digital era has provided a platform ‘for emerging forms of online violence including 
cyberstalking, defamation campaigns, “doxing”, “sextortion” and “trolling”, as well as the non-
consensual distribution of intimate content (or “revenge porn”)’.107  
The 2021 research discussion paper, ‘The Chilling: Global trends in online violence against women 
journalists’ looked precisely at these issues (see box). The paper was based on a global study 
of 901 journalists in 125 countries carried out by the International Center for Journalists (ICFJ), 
as commissioned by UNESCO. It also examined over 2.5 million social media posts directed at 
prominent journalists Maria Ressa, the Filipina founder of the online news site Rappler who was 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2021, and Carole Cadwalladr, a British investigative reporter who 
has spoken out about how online abuse affected her life. The discussion paper found that such 
attacks affect mental health and can bring about physical attacks. Women from ethnic, sexual or 
religious minorities were particularly exposed to attacks.
102   UNESCO. 2018. Murder of TV reporter Victoria Marinova in Bulgaria: DG voices concern over rise in proportion of women reporters killed.  
https:/ /www.unesco.org/en/articles/murder-tv-reporter-victoria-marinova-bulgaria-dg-voices-concern-over-rise-proportion-women-reporters
103  Data as of 6 November 2021. Data from UNESCO observatory of killed journalists. https:/ /en.unesco.org/themes/safety-journalists/observatory
104   See for instance the 2021 report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression UN Doc A/76/258, 
available at: https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2F76%2F258&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False
105  UNGA. 2014. A/RES/68/163  
https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2FRES%2F68%2F163&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False
106   UNESCO. 2019. Intensified attacks, new defences: developments in the fight to protect journalists and end impunity  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371487 , p.54
107  UNGA. 2020. A/HRC/44/52. https:/ /undocs.org/A/HRC/44/52 , p.9
| 63
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2Global trends in online violence against women journalists
The UNESCO discussion paper ‘The Chilling: Global trends in online violence 
against women journalists’ 108  provides hard facts and detailed analysis on the 
following key findings:
	`Online attacks have real-life impacts. Not only do they affect mental health 
and productivity, but also physical attacks and legal harassment are 
increasingly seeded online.
	`Misogyny intersects with other forms of discrimination. Women journalists 
who are also disadvantaged by racism, homophobia, religious bigotry and 
other forms of discrimination face additional exposure to online attacks, with 
worse impacts.
	`Gendered online violence intersects with disinformation. While orchestrated 
disinformation campaigns weaponise misogyny to chill critical reporting, 
reporting on disinformation can be a trigger for heightened attacks.
	`Online attacks against women journalists have political motives. Political 
actors, extremist networks and partisan media are identified as instigators 
and amplifiers of online violence against women journalists.
	`Social media platforms and news organisations are still struggling to respond 
effectively. In the context of an increasingly toxic information ecosystem, 
platforms are seen as major enablers for online violence. When women 
journalists turn to them or their employers in the midst of an online violence 
storm, they often fail to receive effective responses and even face victim-
blaming behaviour.
108   UNESCO. 2021. The Chilling: global trends in online violence against women journalists; research discussion paper.  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000377223
64 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsCase Study – T argeting of female journalists
Jineth Bedoya Lima is a Colombian investigative journalist, whose reporting has focused on 
the armed conflict and peace process in Colombia and on sexual violence against women. On 
May 25, 2000, Bedoya was abducted and raped in connection with an investigation into arms 
trafficking for the daily newspaper, El Espectador. She was visiting the “La Modelo” Prison 
in Bogotá, Colombia, when the kidnappers blindfolded and repeatedly insulted, sexually 
assaulted, and beat the journalist. 
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights heard Bedoya’s case and ruled, on August 26, 2021, 
that the Colombian State was responsible for the violation of the right to personal integrity, 
personal liberty, honour and dignity, and freedom of thought and expression of Bedoya. 
The Court emphasized the particular risk faced by women journalists as a result of gender-
based violence. Therefore, the Court ruled that protection measures must be implemented 
to observe and address the standards of gender-based violence and non-discrimination. In 
addition, it outlined that States have a positive obligation to “a) identify and investigate with due 
diligence the special risks they face as women journalists, as well as the factors that increase 
the possibility of them being victims of violence, and b) implement a gender-based approach 
when adopting measures to guarantee the safety of women journalists, including those of a 
preventive nature, when requested, as well as those aimed at protecting them against reprisals”.
This landmark judgement is the first decision of an international human rights court expanding 
the implementation of human rights standards for the protection of female journalists who 
have been victims of sexual violence in relation to their journalistic work. In this specific case, 
the Court concluded that the State’s duty of prevention required reinforced due diligence, 
since Bedoya was in a doubly vulnerable position: for her work as a journalist and because she 
is a woman. 
The Court further ordered the State to create and implement a training and awareness raising 
program for public officials, law enforcement bodies, and agents of justice to ensure they have 
the necessary skills to: identify acts and manifestations of gender-based violence against 
women that affect women journalists; protect them from dangerous situations; and investigate 
and prosecute the perpetrators.
Following the verdict, the Colombian president tweeted in October 2021 that Colombia will 
“fully comply with the judgement” of the Court.109  
A complete analysis of this case can be found in the case law bank of the Global Freedom of 
Expression Project at Columbia University. Available online at:  
https:/ /globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/cases/bedoya-lima-v-colombia/
Discussion points:
	` Why do you think female journalists face a more severe threat than their male colleagues?
	`  What gender sensitive measures could the security services take to protect and assist them?
109  To read the original tweet, see https:/ /twitter.com/IvanDuque/status/1450200536951689219?s=20
| 65
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 22.4 Protection of journalists
Journalists are really worried about the level of violence, 
threat and intimidation they face from security services. 
This happens in many parts of the world but is particularly 
acute in areas that struggle with security challenges. The 
consequences are often severe: journalists are prevented 
from doing their work, journalism production is hampered 
or compromised, and the public are deprived of the essential 
information that affects their lives. So, it is vital that security 
services and operatives understand the significance of 
journalistic freedom, of allowing journalists to discharge 
their duty, and of protecting them against harm.” 
Dr Abdullahi Tasiu Abubakar, Senior Lecturer and Director of Journalism PhD Programme, City, University of London
2.4. 1 State obligations
The role of LEAs is connected to strategic global aims agreed upon by the international community. 
Under the 2030 Agenda, SDG 16 calls on all UN Member States to promote peace, justice, and strong 
institutions. It highlights, amongst various targets, two that are essential for achieving the goal: 16.3 – 
Promote the rule of law at the national and international levels and ensure equal access to justice for 
all; and 16.10 – Ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance 
with national legislation and international agreements. The latter target specifically aims to tackle the 
rights and safety of journalists. 
As parties to these SDGs, UN Member States and their officials are obliged to make progress in these 
areas. UN decisions also highlight the obligations of States with regard to the protection of journalists. 
The 2013 UN Resolution (A/RES/68/163) on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity urges 
Member States to do their utmost to prevent violence against journalists and media workers and called 
on them to promote a safe and enabling environment for them to perform their work independently 
and without undue interference. It suggests awareness-raising among LEAs, military personnel and 
the judiciary, as well as journalists, on international human rights and humanitarian law obligations. It 
states that such crimes should be publicly condemned.110 
110  UNGA. 2014. A/RES/68/163  
https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2FRES%2F68%2F163&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False
66 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThe UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity 
list the following obligations for Member States:
Develop legislation and mechanisms guaranteeing freedom of expression and 
information, including, for example, requirements that States effectively investigate 
and prosecute crimes against freedom of expression.
Implement existing international rules and principles, as well as to improve, where 
needed, national legislation on safeguarding journalists, media professionals and 
associated personnel in conflict and non-conflict situations.
T ake an active role in the prevention of attacks against journalists and take prompt 
action in response to attacks by establishing national emergency mechanisms, which 
different stakeholders can adopt, for example.
Comply fully with UNESCO General Conference Resolution 296, entitled 
‘Condemnation of Violence against Journalists’, which calls upon Member States to 
adopt the principle that there should be no statute of limitations on persons guilty of 
crimes against freedom of expression; to refine and promote legislation in this field and 
to ensure that defamation becomes a civil, not a criminal action.
Comply with the International Programme for the Development of Communication’s 
Decisions on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity and submit information 
on the actions taken to prevent impunity for killings of journalists, and on the status of 
the judicial inquiries conducted on each of the killings condemned by UNESCO.
Explore ways of broadening the scope of Security Council Resolution 1738, to include 
the promotion of the safety of journalists and the fight against impunity in non-conflict 
situations as well.111 
On 7 March 2021, in Kyoto (Japan) the 14th UN Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 
adopted its final Declaration which calls for action by Member States to:
Investigate, prosecute and punish threats and acts of violence, 
falling within their jurisdiction, committed against 
journalists and media workers, whose professional duties put 
them at specific risk of intimidation, harassment and violence 
through the conduct of impartial, efficient and effective 
investigations, in particular in the context of fighting 
corruption and organized criminal activities, including in 
conflict and post-conflict situations, with a view to ending 
impunity for crimes committed against them, in accordance 
with national legislation and applicable international law”  112 
111 UN. 2016. UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000246014
112  UN. 2021. A/RES/76/181. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/3954768?ln=en , p.11 para. 57
| 67
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2The Declaration further calls to promote the rule of law by ensuring “the integrity and impartiality of law 
enforcement and other institutions comprising the criminal justice system” to guarantee fair, effective, 
accountable, transparent and appropriate administration and delivery of justice.
In summary, international law recognises the hazardous nature of the journalism profession while 
highlighting the duty of States to take necessary measures to reduce those hazards, improve the 
safety of journalists and, if necessary, even physically protect journalists who undoubtedly must 
take personal risks.
In taking such personal risks, the media and LEAs need to cooperate in upholding the rule of law and 
should be protected where possible. LEAs have an obligation to cooperate with media organisations 
to offer guidance to journalists on how best to protect themselves against attack, and how to seek 
justice against the perpetrators.
LEAs can further cooperate with media organisations to ensure that their reporters, photographers, 
or camera operators are properly trained in safety procedures and how to manage threats. And 
ultimately, they can help to monitor, investigate and mitigate threats against journalists.
Discussion points:
	` Do you think states have a duty to protect journalists? 
	` What benefits are there to a government to have a healthy, independent media?
	` What is the impact of a press that is vulnerable to abuse?
2.4.2 Early warning mechanisms
The Council of Europe (CoE)’s Platform to Promote the Protection of Journalism and the Safety of 
Journalists is an early warning mechanism, and a tool for enhancing the response capacity of other 
international organisations. People can post alerts and detail action taken, which helps the CoE 
identify trends and propose adequate policy responses. 
In Africa, media stakeholders have launched their first online digital platform dedicated to the safety 
of journalists, which aims to develop early warning mechanisms, improve the protection of journalists, 
address threats and violence against them, and enhance response capacity within the continent. 
LEAs can learn a lot from monitoring and reporting on such mechanisms.113  
Another example is in the Netherlands, where a hotline was established to enable journalists to report 
acts of aggression and violence. PersVeilig, a joint initiative between the Association of Editors in Chief, 
the Police and the Public Prosecution Service, was set up to strengthen the position of journalists on 
the street, on social media and/or through legal claims. PersVeilig takes various measures to help 
journalists who are threatened including giving them emergency buttons to immediately alert the 
police when threatened, also in online spaces, and installing security cameras around their houses. 
PersVeilig also works to improve awareness-raising among law enforcement services on the issue 
of safety of journalists and to offer training and concrete guidelines for the security services to better 
respond to threats against the media. As a result of this agreement, the police and the public prosecutor 
have committed to give priority to incidents concerning journalists.
113  For further information, consult the platform here: https://safetyofjournalistsinafrica.africa/
68 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsIn Iraq, a reporting mechanism for threats, harassment and attacks against women journalists has 
been created in the form of a telephone helpline, operated by women police officers. Launched 
in 2021, trained women police officers operate the helpline and provide legal advice, as well as 
psychological support to counter societal taboos that may prevent women journalists from reporting 
threats and violence, particularly online.114  In conjunction, a Digital Women Journalists Protection 
Platform115  was also launched in Arabic and English, to provide an official reporting channel for 
female journalists and social media activists on digital threats to their safety. 
Further, in February 2022, the National Union of Journalists of Ukraine set up a hotline for journalists in 
need, including foreign and local correspondents, that could be accessed via e-mail and Facebook. 
The hotline facilitates aid and evacuation procedures for journalists reporting in dangerous and 
critical situations.116 
In many states, the media are so badly paid that journalists 
will take drastic risks to put food on the plate. They fear that 
refusing a story or making demands for protective equipment, 
such as body armour, will result in them being sacked. Many 
media houses do not offer safety training or basic safety 
procedures as they are seen as expensive and time consuming. 
In such states, journalist unions are often ineffective and 
media organisations so insular and competitive that there is 
no solidarity among journalists. This increases the impunity 
of security forces as no one cooperates to challenge them.”
Stephen Smith, founder of Separ International, offering hostile environment and safety training to journalists.
2.4.3 Police Protection examples
Italy
For decades, journalists in Italy have faced physical attacks and intimidation from organised crime and, 
previously, terrorists. Following repeated Mafia attacks, the government set up la Scorta (The Escort), 
the country’s system of police protection.
The Central Interagency Office for Personal Security (UCIS), an independent body within the Ministry 
of the Interior, analyses threat levels against journalists and assigns everything from 24-hour police 
protection and armoured vehicles to low-level assistance. 
In 2018, the Ministry of Interior established the Coordination Centre for permanent monitoring, 
analyses and exchange of information about the intimidation of journalists. The centre, established 
by the Police-General Director for Public Security, provides a forum for dialogue between the press 
and the police to identify the most suitable interventions to prevent and counter attacks against  
the press.117 
114   For further information, see UNESCO. 2022. Multi-Donor Programme on Freedom of Expression and Safety of Journalists: quadriennial report 2018-2021  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381507  p. 32
115  Available at: https:/ /www.ifdrt.iq/
116  NSJU. 2022. Hotline for international journalists in Ukraine. https:/ /nsju.org/novini/hotline-for-international-journalists-in-ukraine/
117   Further information on this Coordination Centre is available at: https:/ /www.interno.gov.it/it/ministero/osservatori-commissioni-e-centri-coordinamento/cen -
tro-coordinamento-sul-fenomeno-atti-intimidatori-nei-confronti-dei-giornalisti
| 69
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2Sweden
A similar scheme has been set up in Sweden where the police authority’s crime victim and personal 
security division (BOPS), maintains contact with media houses. Where required, it offers personal 
protection to those who are threatened and collaborates with other parts of the police when victim 
support is needed.
The police authority has developed online training for police officers, in order to increase their 
ability to deal with hate crimes and crimes against democracy. In addition, Uppsala University has 
been commissioned to develop a five-days specialist course for police officers who deal with such 
attacks. The course includes curriculum covering freedom of speech, freedom of the press and other 
fundamental rights and freedoms of journalists, opinion leaders and politicians; how police officers can 
secure trust among vulnerable groups and individuals; and how to improve the investigation of hate 
crimes and crimes against democracy and stem impunity.118 
Colombia
The National Protection Unit, or  Unidad Nacional de Protección  (UNP) in Colombia, under the Ministry 
of Interior, is a national security agency charged with implementing individual and/or collective 
protection measures for target populations, including journalists and media workers, that are 
vulnerable to threats and risks. The agency is mandated to guarantee the rights of life, liberty, integrity 
and security through implementing adequate protection measures.119  
Once a complaint is filed, members of the UNP and national police coordinate to conduct a risk 
assessment, make recommendations on the allocation of protection measures, and implement these 
through the provision of, for instance, mobile phones, bulletproof vehicles, emergency evacuation and 
transfers.120  
Mexico
Mexico has been the deadliest country for journalists, particularly for those reporting on links between 
organised crime and politics, for several years. According to UNESCO’s Observatory of Killed 
Journalists, 81 journalists and media workers have been killed since 2016.121  
Mexico now has a system to protect journalists, providing police officers to monitor their safety 
24 hours a day, if required. In 2012, the government promoted a law to protect media workers and 
established the Federal Protection Mechanism for Human Rights Defenders and Journalists within its 
interior ministry to address the rising violence. Nine of Mexico’s states also established local protection 
systems.
Journalists who contact the Mechanism are assessed for risk factors. If deemed high risk, the agency 
provides a range of measures such as, body armour, security cameras, a panic button (a small cellular 
device that sends a geolocated SOS), a police bodyguard, relocation and financial assistance. The 
agency also provides links to mental health services for those under particular stress.
In 2015, the mechanism created a unit designed to prevent future violence. It helped create “early 
warning” systems to disseminate information about potential threats to journalists. While the 
Mechanism has saved many lives, it has come under some criticism, denouncing the fact that its 
resources do not match the extent of the national crisis. Among the criticisms is that it does not 
consider factors such as a person’s gender, family and employment needs.
118   CoE. Training on the protection of journalists, Valuable practices and initiatives which provide guidance in this area  
https:/ /www.coe.int/en/web/freedom-expression/training-on-the-protection-of-journalists  (accessed August 2022)
119  For further information see https://www.unp.gov.co/
120   CoE. 2020. How to protect journalists and other media actors? (2020).  
https:/ /edoc.coe.int/en/media/8283-how-to-protect-journalists-and-other-media-actors.html
121  Data as of 1 August 2022. Data available at: https:/ /en.unesco.org/themes/safety-journalists/observatory
70 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsRecognising the Mechanism’s shortcomings, in 2019 the Interior Ministry requested that the UN 
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) conduct an assessment of how it could 
be improved. The report urged the Mexican government to adopt a “paradigm shift towards a more 
preventive approach” to addressing violence against journalists and human rights defenders. 
The Ministry responded by saying that preventative measures would become its priority. It stated it 
would improve the Mechanism’s capacity to track and analyse trends in attacks in different areas 
across the country in order to determine hotspots, identify situations that may pose an elevated risk to 
journalists and human rights defenders in the area, and work with local authorities to promptly address 
those risks. 
Iraq 
A National Committee of Safety of Journalists and Issues of Impunity has been established to address 
crimes and attacks against journalists in Iraq. The Committee is comprised of police officers, judicial 
actors, government representatives, local civil society organisations and the national journalist union, 
and meets regularly to discuss issues related to the safety of journalists. It further produces integrated 
annual reports containing investigative and judicial information.122  In addition, a Special Investigation 
Unit on Crimes against Journalists has been established to effectively investigate threats and attacks 
against journalists in Iraq. 
United Kingdom
In 2021, the United Kingdom established a national committee for the safety of journalists, bringing 
together representatives from the police, the judicial service, the media, and campaigning 
organisations. It is committed to ensuring journalists are not subject to violence, or threats of 
violence.123  In March 2021, the committee published the country’s first ever National Action Plan for 
the Safety of Journalists.124  The plan calls for an increased understanding of the problem, enhancing 
the criminal justice system’s ability to bring those who attack journalists to justice, supporting media 
organisations to build resources to protect themselves, helping online platforms tackle the issue and 
improving public recognition of the value of journalists. 
The plan also states that the police should work to provide training to develop the media’s understanding 
of operations and the police will update their own training to reflect the contemporary role of journalists 
and specifically regarding journalists covering demonstrations. Notably, every police force should 
have a designated journalist safety officer (JSO).
122   UN. 2021. Netherlands supports UNESCO Iraq to enhance the safety of journalists  
https:/ /iraq.un.org/en/160854-netherlands-supports-unesco-iraq-enhance-safety-journalists
123  GOV.UK. 2020. National Committee for the Safety of Journalists. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/groups/national-committee-for-the-safety-of-journalists
124   GOV.UK, 2021. National Action Plan for the Safety of Journalists. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-action-plan-for-the-safety-of-journal -
ists/national-action-plan-for-the-safety-of-journalists#the-plan
| 71
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 2Northern Ireland (UK): Journalist Safety Officer
While not having a specialist unit, the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI), 
as a matter of standard operating procedure, ensure that qualified detectives, 
skilled in investigative techniques, as opposed to generalist officers, are assigned 
to investigate crimes against journalists. Further, a Senior Investigating Officer 
(SIO), of at least Detective Inspector rank, is charged with overseeing all such 
crimes. Such investigations may be instigated by a Journalist Safety Group 
(JSG) – comprised of a security specialist, a crime prevention officer, detectives 
specialising in intelligence and investigation and a Journalist Safety Officer 
(JSO) – upon notification from the JSO and with agreement of the Group. The 
JSG meets, as a minimum, quarterly but may also assemble and react at short 
notice on an ad hoc basis. The JSO is the primary and dedicated point of contact 
for journalists, enabling a rapid early warning mechanism for registering such 
crimes, and is mandated to ensure and maintain an open and effective relationship 
between themselves and journalists. This model is being replicated across the 
UK and, notably, does not require significant extra resources but rather a modest 
organisational change and reappraisal of roles and responsibilities.125 
Kenya: National Mechanism for the Safety & Protection of Journalists
A national mechanism for the safety of journalists has been established in Kenya 
to facilitate a rapid response approach to dealing with threats and attacks against 
journalists. The Kenya Media Sector Working Group, consisting of the Media 
Council of Kenya and the Kenya Union of Journalists, created the mechanism to 
bring together police and judicial authorities, as well as government authorities 
and media stakeholders. A focal point from each of the participating institutions 
convene to share knowledge and best practices; to establish a monitoring and 
reporting system for media rights’ violations; and to create a mechanism for 
supporting investigations and prosecution of the perpetrators.126 
Others
Other states have reported, proposed or implemented new legislation towards promoting the 
safety of journalists. Such measures include improving reporting mechanisms, sensitising and 
building the capacity of the law enforcement system, and creating extensive policy frameworks 
at the national level.127 
Discussion points:
	` Do journalists face threats in your country? 
	` How could the media protect themselves better? 
	` What could the security services do to improve the safety of journalists?
125  PSNI officer interview with the authors, 14 December 2021
126   Media Council of Kenya. National Mechanism for The Safety and Protection of Journalists in Kenya  
https:/ /mediacouncil.or.ke/sites/default/files/downloads/Safety%20Mechanism%20for%20Journalists%2003.pdf  (accessed August 2022)
127   UNESCO. 2021. Threats that silence: trends in the safety of journalists; insights discussion paper; World trends in freedom of expression and media development: 
Global report 2021/2022. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379589.locale=en , pp.24-25. UNESCO. 2021. The UN and the Safety of Journalists: 
Resource Kit for UN Staff. https:/ /en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/unpa_focal_points_on_soj_brochure_2021.pdf , p. 19
72 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents2.5 Activities
The following activities enable trainers to: 
	` Determine whether participants’ level of knowledge on the importance of press freedom has 
increased since the start of the module.
	` Assess whether participants now have a greater understanding of the threats facing journalists 
globally.
	` Encourage participants to examine the issue of press freedom as well as safety both globally and 
from their national perspective.
	` Assess whether earlier misconceptions about the media, freedom of expression and their duty to 
protect journalists have been altered by the material in this module.
2.5. 1 Activity – Online threats
The trainer will create four groups and allocate one of the following questions to each 
one. Each group will be encouraged to answer their selected question, giving examples 
to justify their response. A representative from each group will then present their 
findings for an open debate chaired by the trainer.
	` How does the increasing prevalence of online journalism affect media workers? What threats do 
they face and why?
	` What particular threats do female journalists or those from ethnic minorities face online? Why do 
you think these groups are particularly targeted?
	` What can the security services do to ensure journalists are better protected online? How can they 
help to prevent such virtual attacks?
	` What can the security services do better to ensure such crimes are prosecuted? What legislation 
is needed to target such crimes?
| 73
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 22.5.2 Activity – Safety of journalists
In 2021, the Global Investigative Journalism Network held a webinar debate on Keeping 
Alive the Work of Silenced Journalists. Journalists from different continents debated 
the threat against journalists and how the authorities tackled such issues.  
Further details of who the webinar participants can be seen here: 
https:/ /gijn.org/2021/01/20/gijn-webinar-keeping-alive-the-work-of-silenced-journ  
The trainer can opt to show the participants an entire Global Investigative Journalism Network webinar 
on the safety of journalists or certain sections of it before opening a debate on the issues raised in the 
online conference.
Video: https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=XrCjdIcBH8Q  
	` What were the issues raised by the journalists in this webinar?
	` What were the particular references to the security services and their work?
	` Were the references to security services positive or negative?
	` Debate whether the journalists were correct and fair in their assertions.
2.5.3 Activity – Role play: Journalists
The trainer will create groups as required. Each group will select a recent newsworthy 
event which involved LEAs and role play a journalist trying to cover the event, by 
addressing the questions below. A representative from each group will then present 
their findings for an open debate chaired by the trainer.
	` What information does the journalist require?
	` What sources of information are there?
	` Are the authorities, including LEAs, able and willing to provide information?
	` What risks are there to the journalist in trying to source information?
74 |
Module 2  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsT able of Contents
Key points | 77
3.1 Introduction | 78
3.2 The Media and Law Enforcement Agencies | 79
3.2.1 The Relationship | 80
3.3 The Public and Law Enforcement Agencies | 82
3.3.1  Community policing  | 83
3.4 Messages | 84
3.5 Digital and Social Media | 86
3.6 Working with the Media | 89
3.6.1 lnterviews | 89
3.6.2 Press and Media Releases | 94
3.6.3 Press conferences | 96
3.6.4 Media relations | 98
3.7  Modern Communications Service in Policing  | 99
3.8 Activities | 101
3.8.1 Activity – Digital Environment | 101
3.8.2 A) Activity – Message House | 102
3.8.2 B) Activity – Net practice | 102
3.8.3 Activity – Media relations | 103Module 3
Communicating with  
the media and public
| 75
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3Module aims
 `T o be able to reflect upon the relationship 
between LEAs and the media.
 `T o understand the needs of journalists.
 `T o appreciate and understand the abilities 
and obligations of LEAs to conduct  
two-way engagement with communities 
via mechanisms from social media to  
on-the-street.
 `T o construct basic message structures  
for media engagement.
 `T o conduct effective media engagement 
activities – interviews, press conferences, 
press releases and media relations.
 `T o realise the potential and scope for 
developing human resources for 
communication purposes.
76 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsKey points
	`Despite having similar objectives within their respective functions, journalists and 
LEA officers often have differing approaches in the way they think and work.
	`The public is a significant mover of information and therefore crucial for LEAs in 
being a source, as well as a consumer, of information. 
	`T o achieve their objectives, LEAs should leverage digital means to inform and 
source information from and to the public, at as local a level as possible and via 
contemporary and relevant two-way mechanisms.
	`Although community policing is focussed on greater visibility and face-to-face 
engagement, digital and social media are increasingly playing a massive part in 
enabling this. 
	`The use of digital and social media by LEAs should be encouraged but must also 
be guided by professional policies.
	`All communication should have a basis in a message strategy, with a defined 
objective and relevant themes, information and data.
	`There are four key mechanisms in which LEAs may proactively work with the 
media – interviews, press releases, press conferences and media relations.  
Many LEAs now have dedicated communications or press officers trained in 
these mechanisms.
| 77
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 33. 1 Introduction
…policing needs not just to respond to emergencies and 
investigate crimes, but also to actively engage communities, 
getting to know people and helping to solve their problems. 
If the only time you see police in your neighbourhood is 
when they turn up in numbers to make an arrest, then  
all you see is a police force not a police service. It is a 
crucial distinction.”
Dr Rick Muir, Director of the Police Foundation, the UK’s independent policing think tank128 
As per International Human Rights Law, the ratifying States have an obligation to actively communicate 
with their citizens, either directly or through the media. For effective governance, this communication 
must be two-way, providing relevant information and also sourcing information, to respond adequately. 
Police and security forces, as organs of the State, are not exempt from this requirement.
In many societies, significant amounts of information are now freely available to the vast majority 
of the citizens via both the traditional media but increasingly via the internet and social media, even 
though certain demographics, i.e., those who are poor, persons with disabilities, aged or in rural areas, 
may have much reduced access to such information. Yet, most citizens increasingly have the ability 
themselves to contribute to the information environment, often via social media, sometimes becoming 
highly influential information sources. This makes for a complex environment within which LEAs, 
communicating with those citizens, find themselves.
In communicating messages and understanding the responses to those messages, LEAs have to 
consider all media, from the journalist, who acts as a filter of those messages, through to the public 
themselves, who directly or indirectly receive and react to those messages. Of note, journalists can 
only serve the public interest with assistance from sources who respect the integrity of information, 
including LEAs.
128   The Police Foundation. 2020. Out of the darkness: policing and the death of George Floyd  
https:/ /www.police-foundation.org.uk/2020/06/policing-and-the-death-of-george-floyd/
78 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents3.2 The Media and Law Enforcement Agencies
LEAs and journalists have different approaches, although, in an ideal world, both seek the same final 
goal: to protect human rights and democracies.
In order to best engage effectively with the media and understand their requirements it is necessary 
to understand the nature of the individuals involved, if not ‘get inside their heads’. Further, it is also 
necessary to understand their requirements or ‘newsworthiness’. Journalists have to sell their stories 
to editors, who have to sell them to readers, viewers or listeners. T o a great extent, they operate under 
market dynamics. In order to sell in such conditions, their stories have to exhibit certain qualities, 
including ‘newsworthiness’.
Any engagement with the media must have at its core, a component of newsworthiness. Otherwise, at 
best, that engagement will go nowhere, or, at worst, the journalist will seek to generate his or her own 
story, which may not be helpful to the LEA’s objectives.
Newsworthiness
Timeliness Proximity Possible future impact
Conflict Number of people affected Consequences
Human interest Pathos Shock value
Any engagement with a journalist will nowadays translate into the digital space online. This fact must 
be considered. No longer will an interview, video package, press conference or press release be 
confined to traditional television, radio or print media. And increasingly, the resulting news pieces will be 
packaged for mobile devices. This makes the need for concise, well-formulated and clear messaging 
even more urgent.
Discussion points:
	` What is your opinion of the journalists you know?
	`  Are they all the same?
	`  What do you consider to be their role in society?
| 79
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 33.2. 1 The Relationship
Despite having similar, albeit often unrecognised, objectives, journalists and security forces exercise 
very different mechanisms in different circumstances focused on different direct, short-terms goals, 
especially in public order situations. 
In their role, journalists are not only conveying information to the wider public to enhance their 
awareness but also holding power, i.e., the State and thereby the LEAs, to account. In the latter, they 
are taking their legitimate watchdog position of the ‘fourth estate’, which can often be perceived on the 
ground as, at best, an inconvenience or, at worst, a threat by police officers and security personnel.
Likewise, in ensuring public order and upholding the law, LEAs, are acting as a legitimate arm of the 
State and public institutions, thereby correctly protecting citizen’s rights, including their freedoms.
The fourth estate can be defined as “Newspapers in particular, and the news 
media in general, regarded as a legitimate political force performing a watchdog 
function” 129 
In most democratic countries, there is a separation of power between a legislature, 
an executive, and a judiciary. These are the ‘three estates’ in the contemporary 
situation, in the context of which the media is sometimes referred to as the  
fourth estate.
However, under media scrutiny, in often complex and dangerous public order situations, the actions 
of LEAs may be viewed as a threat to citizens’ freedoms, even if such actions are lawful (which is not 
always the case). In these circumstances, where misunderstanding by the media of legitimate and 
proportional actions of LEAs may lead to adverse media coverage, it is incumbent on both parties to 
address such misunderstanding by fostering a sound relationship between the media and the LEAs.
However, in reality, there are two significant factors that may impinge upon such a relationship:
1. When the actions of LEAs are not legitimate or proportionate, and they are correctly identified 
and reported as such by the media.
2. When the media, driven by non-professional pressures, such as politics or commercial 
pressures, wilfully report the legitimate actions of LEAs in a partial, often negative light, 
regardless of objective reality and legal grounding, in order to further a political agenda or 
merely produce a story. 
Discussion points:
	` Have you seen instances of either of the points above?
	` Why were these instances reported as they were?
	` In these instances, was the reality of the situation absolutely clear and straightforward or 
could there have been ambiguity and obscurity?
129   Oxford Dictionary of Media and Communication. 2020. For reference, see https:/ /www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authori -
ty.20110803095831292#:~:text=Quick%20Reference&text=1.,force%20performing%20a%20watchdog%20function
80 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsIt is in the grey zone between these two possibilities that work is required by both sides in order to best 
support the rule of law and uphold citizens’ rights and freedoms.
1. Recognise the differences in mindsets between the media and LEAs.
2. Recognise the similar high-level goals of each.
3. Recognise that the media can, in crisis situations, assist LEAs in achieving operational goals 
regarding public safety.
4. Recognise that through better understanding of security and legal issues, the media can better 
report factually concerning those issues.
| 81
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 33.3 The Public and Law Enforcement Agencies
As a public that contributes to the information environment, individuals aggregate, curate, generate, 
adapt, comment and, most importantly, share information. Individuals collect content by aggregating 
– T witter lists, Spotify playlists, personal You T ube channels – and then add their own opinion – likes, 
comments, ratings – to that content, for everyone or a selected cluster of people to see, and then 
continue the process. The public is a significant mover of information and therefore crucial for LEAs 
in being a source, as well as a consumer, of information. A factor to consider here is that internet 
platforms are not neutral – their algorithms’ design might promote sensationalist content, including 
disinformation, and even to recommend groups whose respect for the rule of law is non-existent. 
Information regarding LEA activity – closing roads, measures to facilitate assemblies, enforcing 
curfews, deployment to attend incidents – as well as public announcements informing the public 
regarding issues – hazards, safety measures, arrests, sentencing – may be considered transmitted 
information available to the public. Equally, requests from LEAs for information – for witnesses, crime 
reporting, traffic problems – from the public can result in information received to assist LEAs in their 
duties. The former, transmitted public information, can be via traditional media or directly via digital 
means, notably social media. The latter, received public information, is increasingly via social media 
or more traditionally via telephone. LEAs can therefore, in order to achieve their objectives, leverage 
digital means to inform and source information both from and to the public.
However, this public-facing communications capability requires human resources. An LEA digital 
capability that does not have a regular, even constant, human presence behind it may create a false, 
and potentially dangerous, sense of security with the public. Most publics are accustomed to rapid 
replies on social media, especially in circumstances where officers may be required to intervene. No 
response, or even a slow response, results in mistrust.
Discussion points:
	` How does your LEA predominantly communicate with citizens?
	` Who controls and coordinates any public communications that your LEA carries out?
82 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents3.3. 1 Community policing
Any discussion about communications between LEAs and the public is incomplete without reference 
to community policing.130 
Community policing is based on the principle that community participation in enhancing safety and 
solving community-related crime should be promoted, as LEAs cannot act in isolation. In order to 
engage civil society in sharing this responsibility, LEAs must build trust and develop a partnership. 
This partnership should be characterised by mutual responsiveness and an equal footing. Community 
policing presents the idea that in order to achieve a partnership, officers must be better integrated into 
the community and strengthen their legitimacy through policing by consent, improving their services, 
being present, listening and responding to the communities’ needs, and being accountable for their 
actions. At the same time, LEAs need to be aware of the socio-economic situation of the communities 
they work in. In terms of accountability, LEAs must be responsive to negative and problematic 
behaviour of their officers, misconduct and corruption. It is key to have oversight; and to be transparent 
about their operations.131  
Although the concept is focused on greater physical visibility and face-to-face engagement, digital and 
social media are increasingly playing a massive part in enabling community policing. As a continuing 
challenge for LEAs, this trend is best seen within the context of the reinvigoration of community 
policing around the globe.132  Online forums (e.g., website-hosted or Facebook), local microblogs (e.g., 
T witter), even hyper-localised mobile instant messaging services (MIMS), such as WhatsApp or Viber 
can boost two-way engagement for the purposes of consulting and mobilising the public, adapting to 
local issues and promoting a collaborative solutions-oriented approach.
Discussion points:
	` How do your LEA officers really get to understand their areas of patrol or ‘beats’?
	` Is community policing part of your LEAs approach to policing?
	` If so, how are community relations with the LEA developed and maintained?
130  Sometimes referred to as neighbourhood, proximity or community-oriented policing
131   For more on Community Policing see UNODC. 2013. Training Manual on Policing Urban Space  
https:/ /www.unodc.org/documents/justice-and-prison-reform/crimeprevention/T raining_Manual_Policing_Urban_Space_V1258164.pdf
132   See Bullock, K., 2017. The Police Use of Social Media: Transformation or Normalisation? https:/ /www.cambridge.org/core/journals/social-policy-and-society/
article/police-use-of-social-media-transformation-or-normalisation/19E5C6727038F01129B51CE4287D0FFB
| 83
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 33.4 Messages
No matter how many outlets there are out there, one of the 
basic principles of public relations still applies; If you don’t 
tell your story, someone else will.”
Chris Ender, CBS Chief of Communications
Whether for an interview, public statement, tweet, social media post or campaign, at the heart of any 
communication with the public, directly or via the media, should be a message. This forms an idea in 
the public’s consciousness of what is being communicated to them and ultimately how to respond to it. 
LEA messaging and the public response tend towards:
	` Reassurance – an issue will be / has been resolved; the public can trust the authorities.
 and/or 
	` Action – there is / will be an issue; the public is to take action to mitigate its effect or assist the 
LEA (i.e., witness appeal, anti-crime campaign). However, poor response by law enforcement 
can fuel vigilantism. 
In either case, the words, images, digital content and actions of LEAs should work together to present 
a message (or idea) that should elicit the required response. 
Many LEAs, especially those with communications resources, may have their own approaches but 
a simple mechanism for designing a message structure is the Message House. The concept visually 
designed in the shape of a house, is based on information and data to support three themes, which in 
turn form a message encouraging a response. An example, applicable to LEAs, is shown here:
Information & Data
What happened,  
Who is involved,  
where and when, 
consequencesInformation & Data
What is being done,  
What has been done before, 
resources deployed, 
experience in dealing  
with issueCommunication Objective:
Public mobilised to assist  
and taking precautions
Message
LEA has effective capabilities to deal  
with event as long as public assist  
and comply with instructions
Supporting  
Theme 1
EventSupporting  
Theme 2
ResponseSupporting  
Theme 3
Action Required
Information & Data
Information required from 
public, how to report, 
precautions to be taken, 
warning
 
Figure 3.1: Message House Example
84 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsAll communications should focus on the message, by providing relevant information and data that 
detail the event (e.g., murder, accident, crime, demonstration), the response (e.g., areas cordoned off, 
searches, previous experience) and actions required (e.g., avoid area, report suspicions, evacuate), so 
as to mobilise the public to assist and take heed of specific warnings. Of note, this mechanism is not 
only about providing information to the public but also about providing the necessary information in a 
way that highlights specific themes, implants a simple idea and seeks to provoke a certain behavioural 
response. 
Note that messages may be interpreted entirely differently to what the sender intends. There is 
no stimulus-response model of communications. Especially if LEA actions do not match their 
communication, messages may have little (or even negative) effect. 
Good messages
In building the message house, the order of construction is themes-first, followed by developing 
a message that captures all of those themes. This may be an iterative process, altering themes and 
message until they perfectly complement each other. Once they are fixed, information, stories and 
examples – which can also include imagery, data and quotes – can be gathered to provide concrete 
foundations for the themes.
Good messages:
	` Are very simple 
	` Have three themes (at most)
	` Are unambiguous (i.e. cannot be misunderstood) 
	` Involve themes that are resonant with the audience 
	` Include a call to action 
	` Are not hashtags but are fully formed without being too long (from which hashtags can be 
extrapolated).
Discussion points:
	` Can you identify any recent occasions where the public should or were reassured or called to 
action by your LEA?
	` Were there or should there have been any identifiable messages in that communication?
| 85
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 33.5 Digital and Social Media
In order for law enforcement agencies and communities  
to work together to address issues, there must be clear 
channels for communicating and disseminating 
information. Further, communication and transparency 
are essential to building police-community relations and 
public trust. Enhanced communication, facilitated by  
social media engagement, can lead to greater community 
cooperation in partnerships to prevent crime.”
Social Media Guidebook for Law Enforcement Agencies133 
For LEAs to be relevant to their publics, to engage with their communities, an ethos of two-way 
engagement is utterly vital. The old ways of communication, often embedded within hierarchical, 
rules-focused institutions, like LEAs, have limited effect online, especially with younger audiences.134 
Old versus new
The manner in which organisations must communicate on digital and social media 
revolves around two-way engagement, which requires new ways of approaching 
communication.
Old    New
T ransmit  Engage and participate
Preach    Advocate
Command and control  Influence and persuade
Formal and instructive   Informal and conversational
T ell the audience   Build community
LEAs and their staff can operate three kinds of social media accounts:
	` Official corporate accounts – managed centrally at various levels, from national to local. Any 
content issued via those platforms can be considered as an official comment or statement from 
the LEA. These accounts are where the communities, media and general public, and across the 
world, can get the latest news, updates and comment from the police. These accounts may also 
be used for reporting crime or incidents.
133   Justice Policy Center. 2019. Social Media Guidebook for Law Enforcement Agencies  
https:/ /www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/99786/social_media_guidebook_for_law_enforcement_agencies_0.pdf , p.6
134   On the use of social media by public officials, see a report of the UN Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers focused on the exercise of the 
rights to freedom of expression, and peaceful assembly by judges and prosecutors, both offline and online, available at: https:/ /independence-judges-lawyers.org/
reports/report-on-freedom-of-expression-association-and-peaceful-assembly-by-judges-and-prosecutors/  The recommendations issued in this report may 
be of interest to LEAs as well
86 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents	` Individual corporate accounts – managed by selected individual officers or their staff, in their own 
name but for LEA purposes. A senior officer may choose to do this. These accounts are less 
formal than official corporate accounts and may be used for more general purposes or 
campaigns.
Note:  T oo many corporate accounts can lead to confusion amongst the public, and so the opening 
of new accounts must be decided with care. There must be a clear policing purpose to creating new 
accounts, which are resource intensive and create expectations with the public about expected 
engagement. 
Corporate accounts (official or individual) should not:
	` Contain any material that may jeopardise a police investigation
	` Infringe upon laws/regulations (e.g., copyright, contempt of court)
	` Incite racial, sexual, religious or social hatred
	` Bring the LEA into disrepute
	` Breach the LEA codes of conduct
	` Criticise the LEA, other public departments or member of the government
	` Be political in nature 
Content on corporate accounts should also comply with the following:
	` National media laws must be adhered to. 
	` Permission must be obtained from individuals who can be identified in images or videos before 
these are posted on social media accounts, and that permission must be documented by the 
person taking the photograph or the video and retained for records. 
	` All content used on social media channels must be compliant with copyright, data protection and 
media law rules. Information and content published on social media channels must follow the 
LEA’s media guidelines, to ensure it does not breach any laws or jeopardise any investigations or 
legal proceedings. 
	` Creative content must not be sourced from the internet, as it may be in breach of copyright and put 
the LEA at risk of legal action.
	` Content may be provided by any officer as long as LEA social media guidelines are followed.135  
Individual accounts are those used by LEA officers but in a personal capacity, just as a member 
of the public, unrelated to their positions. Even so, posting on these accounts should adhere to 
the professional standards, codes and regulations for LEA officers and staff. These accounts are 
controlled by the individual user, and content posted from them is that person’s responsibility. Users 
must ensure they have appropriate privacy settings. 
However, LEA social media activity can sometimes attract critical comments that are negative, offensive 
or abusive. It is important that LEAs avoid being drawn into conflict with others on social media.
135   A comprehensive example of a Police social media policy is that of the UK’s Gloucestershire Constabulary, available at: https:/ /www.gloucestershire.police.uk/
SysSiteAssets/foi-media/gloucestershire/policies/force-social-media-policy . Note that, on p. 12, it is stated that this policy is explicitly required to be on the public 
domain website, as a matter of default
| 87
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3The profiles of official corporate social media channels should contain a clear statement that the LEA 
will not tolerate abusive behaviour or language online, that pages are moderated where possible, 
and that any comments or content found to be in breach of these requirements will be removed or 
submitted to the platform owners for removal.
If abusive comments or content cannot be removed, they should either be ignored or proactively (not 
reactively) countered in a non-aggressive manner.
Discussion points:
	` Y our national LEA most probably has a website and social media. Do local or regional 
branches (city, town, stations etc) also have websites?
	` If locals wanted to interact with local police on social media, could they?
Case Study – Police social media
A good example of successful social media use by a local LEA comes from Bangor, Maine 
in the US, which for a small town of 30,000 has over 300,000 following the local police 
Facebook page. The page uses an unconventional, conversational even humorous tone in its 
posts, and it has developed an appeal and utility amongst the town’s citizens. The approach 
will not necessarily work everywhere. But, its success illustrates that successful LEA social 
media efforts – rely on a deep understanding of the community, require a dedicated public 
information officer and take considerable time to maintain. Further, it is recognised that 
this Facebook community engagement platform cannot and should not replace standard 
emergency response channels, such as the phoneline.
“You can’t just tell people things. You need to listen to people, to what they have to say. They’re 
telling you what they want from you.” Lieutenant Tim Cotton, Bangor Police Department.
https:/ /www.facebook.com/bangormainepolice
88 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents3.6 Working with the Media
The media has a significant role in holding policing to 
account and informing the public about the work of the 
police service. There is an obligation on the police service 
to engage with the media, both to communicate what the 
police are trying to do strategically and, at an operational 
level, to engage the public in fighting crime.” 136 
Guidance on Relationships with the Media
There are four key mechanisms in which LEAs may proactively work with the media: interviews, press 
releases, press conferences and media relations. Many LEAs now have dedicated communications or 
press officers trained in these mechanisms (see below Modern Communication Service in Policing). 
Below are the basics required of LEAs that are not fully resourced in this way and to provide initial 
guidance for new communications or press officers.
3.6. 1 lnterviews
Giving a press interview remains a daunting experience for most, predominantly because of the 
misapprehension that all control of the output – not to mention reputation – has been handed over to 
the journalist. Yet, in the market of information, it is the interviewee who is in the powerful position of 
being the guardian of the knowledge the interviewer seeks. 
The essence of a successful interview is preparation. Anticipate what questions you may face, and 
maintain control by sticking within the parameters of what you have already decided you want to say.
The first thing to consider is what the informational objective is, in giving the interview. Followed by the 
behavioural or attitudinal change required in the audience. For these, the Message House approach 
(see above) can help.
Research and Preparation
The interviewer and news outlet should be researched.
	` What organisation are they from? 
	` Is it broadcast, print or a mixture of both? 
	` What is the agenda and ideology of the media outlet? 
	` Has it shown a positive or negative stance towards the LEA? Is this justified? – it may be in some 
cases. 
	` Who is their audience? 
136  College of Policing. 2013. Guidance on Relationships with the Media. https:/ /www.npcc.police.uk/documents/reports/2013/201305-cop-media-rels.pdf , p.5
| 89
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3The journalist’s previous articles or pieces should be examined. 
	` Have they tended to be measured or inflammatory? 
	` Ask colleagues/your communications team if they have been interviewed by the reporter? 
	` What was their experience? 
	` Was the output accurate and satisfactory to them?
Of note is the fact that the ultimate listener, viewer or reader is not the journalist. He or she is simply a 
channel to their readers, listeners or viewers. Journalism sets agendas and frames how messages can 
be influenced. 
The mode of interview should be established. 
	` In person, by telephone, in a studio, at the scene, recorded or live? 
	` “Doorstep” on-the-spot interviews should be avoided. They should be politely declined with an 
offer to give an interview later, thus allowing time to prepare.
The journalist should be asked to outline his or her objective and background. 
	` A reporter will rarely be able to give a full list of questions, as they will mostly be based on the 
interviewee’s responses. But they can give an indication of what they want to know and how 
extensive the piece will be. 
	` What has been reported on the subject before? 
	` Who else will be interviewed? 
Planning
The Message House approach (see above) can be used to define what the LEA’s objective is, what 
message should be expressed, and what themes, information and data are required to do so. This is 
essentially what the interviewee should communicate, regardless of the questions.
Careful consideration of the potential questions and answers is vital. Ideally, the interviewee should try, 
with the help of a communications officer or colleagues, to participate in a mock interview, sometimes 
called ‘net practice’. Identification of the toughest questions possible and consideration of the best way 
to handle those difficult subjects should also be part of the preparation. This approach is sometimes 
referred to as Worst Question/Best Answer (WQBA).
Any tangential issues that the journalist may raise should also be considered. Has something relevant 
to the LEA or policing recently appeared in the news? There is a chance the journalist will use the 
interview as an opportunity to explore the matter further.
Just Prior to the Interview
Before the interview, it should be clarified to define what can be discussed and what topics are out of 
bounds (see Module 7). 
It is recommended that the LEA officers record interviews, often using a smart phone, informing the 
journalist that it is being recorded. This will provide an accurate account of the interview, should there 
be any mistakes, misquotes or misunderstandings in the final edit.
90 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsDuring the Interview
Interviewees should:
	` Stick to the messages prepared and resist the temptation to wander off on to other issues. 
	` Steer clear of using jargon, abbreviations or acronyms the audience will not understand.
	` Remain calm and relaxed. Even if the interviewer becomes aggressive or combative, the 
interviewed should remain composed throughout.
	` Avoid talking ‘off-the record’. Background or off-the-record should only be used if the interviewee 
or LEA communications officer knows and trusts the journalist (see Liaison below).
	` Stick to the truth. Do not be tempted to misinform. In this age of fast, global information, lies are too 
easily caught out. One falsehood can irreparably damage the credibility that is essential to good 
communications. 
	` Avoid cherry-picking questions asked, but seek to honestly respond to all. 
Interviewees should not:
	` Blame other agencies or entities. The journalist will only seek out their opinion and it is likely to be 
adversarial. 
	` Be tempted to guess facts or agree on statistics that a journalist may produce without validating 
the source. The interviewee may respond by saying he or she will need to check something and 
get back to the journalist. That promise must then be followed through. 
	` Give their own personal opinions. 
	` Say “no comment”. It simply implies guilt. Instead, explain why it is not possible to respond. 
	` Speculate. If a journalist invites you to speculate or debate a hypothetical situation, politely refuse. 
No one can look with certainty into the future, and there is a danger that the interviewee will be 
accused of getting it wrong at a later date.
	` Guarantee or promise. The interviewee, via ABC (see below in this section), should avoid 
questions that seek a guarantee or promise (e.g., “can you guarantee that this will never happen 
again?”). They provide a lose-lose option: If the interviewee fails to guarantee, that will be seen as a 
tacit agreement that it will happen again; if a guarantee is provided, there is a risk of failure. This is 
particularly true in today’s media environment, where all previous articles and footage are easily 
accessible electronically.
Do Not:  Blame people/agencies  Do:  Be prepared
 Misinform  Be yourself
 Wander off subject  Be well informed
 Speculate   Be truthful
 Be too categorical   Listen
 Be other than positive  Apply ABC
 T alk ‘off the record’  If a crisis express CAP
| 91
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3CAP
During a crisis (see Module 4) in which people have suffered, an essential element of any interview is 
expressing CAP:
	` Concern  – sympathy for those affected (without expressing liability)
	` Action  – a commitment to do something about the crisis (if it is within your capabilities)
	` Praise  – for those dealing with the crisis
ABC
A commonly used technique for dealing with difficult subjects or those that you are not entitled to 
discuss further is to:
Answer or Acknowledge – Bridge – Communicate (ABC)
ABC provides a way of addressing the question, using certain phrases to move away from it and then 
delivering information or data to support your message.
Bridging phrases
What’s more … However …  We really need to … The important point is …  
But … The crucial thing is …  Moreover … And …
Let’s consider … A great example is … If we really think about it … It’s vital that …
Of interest is … Just think about … Consider … Imagine …
Yet … Looking at … Reflecting upon … The question is …
An example would be as follows: 
Q: Why did it take you so long for you to respond to this chemical tanker spill? 
A: Officers were on site within eight minutes of being informed, within our mandated response time 
despite traffic building up in the vicinity, and we have opened access up for the fire services (Answer) 
but (Bridge) right now we are urging the public to avoid this area so that clean-up operations can 
commence and those within one mile of the location to remain indoors, where they will be safe 
(Communicate).
or
Q: Will the local council be pressing charges?
A: That’s for the local council to decide (Acknowledge). However (Bridge), we encourage any members 
of the public who were witness to the event to come forward so that we can continue our thorough 
investigations. This is to ensure that, if a case is brought forward, all relevant evidence may be made 
available to the court (Communicate).
Note:  The default option is that if the interviewee can answer a question, it should be answered. 
However, see Module 7 regarding the withholding of information.
92 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsDiscussion points:
	` At a local (county, state, city, town) level are LEA spokespersons available?
	` If so, are they supported by communications or press officers?
	` If not, who acts as the spokesperson at a local level?
Video and Audio Interviews
The broadcast media has its own special requirements. Simply put, television or video is driven by 
imagery while radio or audio is all about sound. There are many different modes of broadcast interview 
– studio, panel, ‘down-the-line’, video tele-conference (VTC, e.g., Zoom), print, etc. – all of which have 
their own quirks, which are beyond the scope of this Manual. But, the most likely interview venue for 
LEAs is on location at the scene, either live or recorded. 
A live interview is the most daunting option, but it will generally be shorter and will allow more control 
over output, as there is no editing involved initially. Nevertheless, it could be cut at a later stage and 
certain sections retransmitted. Before a broadcast interview goes live, the interviewee should ask 
what the first question will be so that he or she has a moment to prepare. If the piece is recorded, 
the interviewee may pause to consider his or her response or even ask the interviewer to repeat the 
question. Equally, as only certain sections will be broadcast, the key message should be repeated. 
In either case, in video and audio, the background is important. The interviewee should ensure that the 
background does not counter the message. For example, a message expressing control of a situation 
should not have a chaotic background. 
Regarding the interviewee’s appearance, security-sensitive items such as identity cards should be 
removed, as should sunglasses. Peaked caps are acceptable unless they overshadow the face. 
Body language, tone of voice and facial expressions are also very important as the audience will 
subconsciously take signals from them. 
In all circumstances, if the journalist is present with the interviewee, then the interviewee should 
address the journalist not the camera.
Video teleconference (VTC) interviews are increasingly common and, while the principles above 
apply, there are a few specific considerations to make the best of them.
	` Background – A real background with few distractions is better than a blurred or inserted 
background.
	` The camera – The camera, often to the side of a laptop’s screen, should be at eye level. Looking 
down at the audience can be intimidating. The interviewee should look into the camera not at the 
video window of the interviewer. 
	` Lighting – Backlighting and uplighting should be avoided. Natural light, via a window, is best.
| 93
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3Authority
Not all officers will be authorised to speak to the media. So it is important that those who are authorised 
are fully aware of how to respond to a journalist in a positive manner. 
This should be outlined in media guidance protocols and understood by all officers.137 
Discussion points:
	` How familiar and experienced are you or any potential spokesperson in using a video tele-
conference (VTC) system (e.g., Zoom, T eams Skype, etc.)?
3.6.2 Press and Media Releases
Due to digital and social media, press releases are today part of a mix of communications capabilities, 
often available to all publics including journalists. For LEAs, the traditional press release, targeted 
specifically towards journalists, still has a vital role in enabling journalists to comprehensively develop 
stories and not only rely on elements gleaned through social media. Press releases should be designed 
to make it as easy as possible for journalists to use the released material.
Any press release must answer the following questions (5Ws and an H):
	` Who?  Who is involved? Who does this affect? Who does it benefit?
	` What?  What is happening / has happened?
	` Why?  Why is this important?
	` Where?  Where has this happened / is this happening?
	` When?  What is the timing of this? Does this add significance?
	` How?  How did this come about?
Responses to these questions should be as brief and direct as possible (not as if written in a story) 
and should be as comprehensive as possible. Any glaring gaps will be newsworthy in themselves and 
should be explained if information is not available. The language used should avoid over complicated 
legal terminology and jargon.
Press Release Structure
A standard approach in preparing a press release is to use the inverted pyramid structure (see below) 
with the most pertinent information at the top. Many commercial press releases are now story-based, 
but an LEA press release should never be written as a story, with the main element at the end – this is 
called ‘burying the lead’.
137   A comprehensive example of Police Media Policy is that of Australia’s New South Wales Police, available at: https:/ /www.police.nsw.gov.au/ __data/assets/
pdf_file/0003/175269/13478_Media_Policy_2016_Update_may_2020.pdf . See pp. 10-11, and Appendix 2 regarding authority to comment
94 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThe Lead: Answer the ‘5 W’s and H’
Credibility: Facts & Figures
Importance: Why it matters
Quotes
Contact details
Notes to Editors
Figure 3.2: Press release structure
Timing – Immediate Release or Embargo
It must be indicated at the top of the release whether it is for immediate release or under embargo 
and, if so, should provide the release date. Generally, for LEAs, immediate release will be the norm. 
Releases, if immediate, should be sent out with the relevant media cycle in mind, to provide enough 
time for journalists to process the information, follow up, and then produce stories or copy in time for 
their content production.
An embargo does not mean that journalists cannot contact the LEA about the information. It just means 
that they are requested not to use the information before a particular time and date.
Title
Under the immediate release or embargo heading should be a title. However, most journalists/editors 
will change the title anyway if the release is to be used.
Length
Keep the copy as tight as possible. If the release runs to three or more pages, this suggests it is an 
article rather than a press release.
All important information should be provided in the first paragraph. The test of success is whether the 
story can be understood in its entirety if only the first paragraph were to be reproduced in print. The 
second paragraph should expand on information in the first, giving a bit more detail. Often, the third 
paragraph provides a quote. The fourth paragraph should outline final information, such as referencing 
websites or links to other related organisations.
Ending
The end of the press release should state the word “Ends” in bold. After this, contact details of an 
appointed person should be stated. A mobile number should be provided so that journalists can 
make contact out of office hours. The more accessible the contact, the better. If any further points of 
information are needed, these go in “notes to editors” after the contact information. 
| 95
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3Contacting the Media
Generally, direct contact with journalists is by email, although such releases may, if not embargoed, go 
on the LEA website and social media. It is wise to provide the title in the subject line of the email in order 
to grab the journalist’s attention. Any release sent by email should be pasted into the email rather than 
attached. Many press and media organisations have automatic blocks on attachments. 
Imagery
Exclusive imagery, as in unique imagery taken by the LEA, will be welcomed by journalists and should, 
if available, be released. 
3.6.3 Press conferences
The informed, unmanaged question. That’s the most 
dangerous thing at a press conference anywhere.”
Ron Suskind, Pullitzer Prize Winner (1995)
Whether dealing with an immediate issue or circulating good news, press conferences are a key way 
of information dissemination, especially if urgent.
It is important a wide variety of media is invited, to avoid showing favouritism, which will only alienate 
the sceptical media actors even further. This will rely on the LEA having up-to-date media contact lists, 
which should also include key bloggers or prolific T weeters.
Preparation
Prior to the press conference, a Message House should be developed, which can inform a public 
statement and the principals (speakers) should also participate in a mock interview. If possible, a 
rehearsal and a degree of ‘net practice’ should be conducted. This will help principals prepare to take 
questions and, as in an interview, practice ABC (see above).
Considerations:
	` The location must be suitable for the numbers involved and secure, with adequate access and 
transportation.
	` The principals should be of the appropriate seniority for the gravity of the news being imparted 
and should have right expertise and information to answer detailed questions. Often a senior 
officer may lead, with others with subject matter expertise alongside him or her. 
	` Coordination with other bodies who are handling different aspects of an incident may be needed.
	` If time allows, supporting background material should be prepared for the media, which could cut 
down on any basic questions and ensure accurate reporting.
	` The conference should also be video recorded by the LEA hosting it.
96 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents	` Given the nature of LEAs’ work, security should be paramount, especially if working in a non-
benign environment. If journalists are accredited in some manner, their credentials should be 
checked. Otherwise, all entering the press conference should have their identity checked against 
the invitation list.
	` Some media, particularly broadcast, may require one-to-one interviews. Requests should be 
taken before or at the beginning so a timetable can be set out for the end of the conference 
according to the urgency of their respective deadlines.
	` The layout of the location should be planned. A diagram of an ideal venue is below:
 Press Seating
Raised area for 
Camera CrewsPress Seating
Raised area for 
Camera CrewsLEA LogoX
X
Press OfficerDraped T ableBackground Principal(s)
Limit of Media’s forward movement 
Figure 3.3: Press conference ideal layout
The Press Officer / Point of Control
The communications or press officer’s role is primary in controlling the conference, alleviating the 
pressure on the principals and managing any questioning. If such an officer is not available, then 
someone should be nominated to be the ‘Point of Control’, effectively the Master of Ceremonies. 
Importantly, this should not be one of the principals – who should focus on their speaking roles – unless 
that individual is experienced and trained in media engagement.
Prior to the start of the press conference, this Point of Control should:
	` Welcome the media, explain who the speakers are and the parameters of the meeting, including a 
time frame (which should be followed). 
	` If a statement is to be made, hard copies should be distributed after the conference to ensure 
accurate reporting.
	` Explain the manner of nominations for questions and manner in which they should be asked.  
This normally means the officer will nominate who is to ask a question, then the nominated should 
identify themselves before asking a question. They would normally be allowed one follow-up 
question (possibly more depending on the number of media and time frame). The Point of Control 
may give local media priority, but should verbally explain this at the outset. 
	` Chair the conference and politely move on from anyone who has decided to lecture the principals 
or barrage them with repeated accusations.
	` Manage one-to-one interviews with principals.
As with any other media situation, the essence of success is to maintain control, inform in a transparent 
way and ensure that messages are clearly delivered.
| 97
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3Discussion points:
	` Does your LEA conduct press conferences?
	` Are they well-presented and managed, reflecting well on the LEA?
3.6.4 Media relations
There are other ways in which the media can be helped to understand LEAs and their issues, to enable 
a more constructive relationship. These could be:
T raining Events
	` LEA officers can be involved in journalism training, giving a perspective from their side but also 
instructing journalists in how to best work with LEAs.
	` Journalists can be invited to contribute to LEA training so that officers can understand their ways 
of working and how to facilitate the media in its work, especially during protests and elections.138  
	` Journalists could also benefit from attending, as observers, LEA exercises – such as those for riot 
control, armed intervention or search.
Embedding / ‘Ride Alongs’
In certain circumstances, an LEA may wish to allow selected journalists to join officers on operations 
so that they may better understand a specific newsworthy event. In such cases, safety is vital, a risk 
assessment should be conducted, media presence should be factored into the operation planning 
and journalists must be fully briefed. Further, journalists must be readily identifiable as such. 
Liaison
As has been expressed above, relationships and communication are vital to allowing LEAs and 
journalists to work towards common societal goals while also pursuing their distinct professional 
aims. For LEAs, this requires a significant commitment, which can only really be achieved if 
understood and championed at a senior level and specifically resourced at a middle-ranking and 
junior level through dedicated and trained communications or press officers.139  Although care 
should be taken to abide by strict codes of conduct and not cross professional boundaries, genuine 
relationship building and mutual understanding between LEAs and media can bring great benefits 
to both groups, and the public.
Discussion points:
	` Within your LEA, at whatever level (State, county, city, town), is there someone dedicated to 
general media relations – training, embedding, liaison, etc.?
	` If not, should there be?
138   UNESCO. 2020. Safety of journalists covering protests : preserving freedom of the press during times of turmoil  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206
139  Variously called: Public Information Officers (PIOs), Public Affairs Officers (PAOs), Public Relations Officers (PROs), Unit Press Officers (UPOs) and other derivations
98 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents3.7 Modern Communications Service in Policing
In many parts of the world, LEAs staff their press offices with civilians who are qualified professionals 
(rather than with LEA officers) for the following reasons:
1. People with professional training and experience in PR/journalism (print, broadcast and social 
media) better understand how the media works and how to create engaging content – and thus, 
how to get the best media coverage for the LEA’s efforts and minimize any reputational damage.
2. They are able to fulfil a role of ‘trusted advisor’ to senior officers, giving advice to colleagues based 
upon their professional experience and globally shared best practices in corporate 
communications. 
3. By civilianising these posts, the LEA can use their specially trained (and scarce) resources for 
policing alone, thereby making best use of the investment in those officers. 
Basic Overall Functions of a Modern LEA Corporate Communications Service
1. Strategic communications planning and campaigns: setting, co-ordinating and guiding the 
implementation of activity, as part of an overarching organisational plan to deliver against agreed 
organisational priorities. Also builds and plans internal and external communications campaigns 
aimed at informing, educating and changing attitudes and behaviour. 
2. Internal communications: effective communication with officers and staff to engage them in 
delivering towards the organisation’s goals and positive cultural change within the organisation. 
3. Media relations/news: proactive and reactive handling of the media, relationship management 
with journalists, multi-media content creation, and insight and evaluation to inform 
communications strategy. Also monitoring media coverage for emerging reputational issues or 
problems.
Discussion points:
	` Are the basic overall functions of a modern LEA corporate communications service  
covered within your LEA?
	` If not, where are the gaps?
	` How could your LEA upskill its communications officers or function?
| 99
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3Head of LEA Corporate Communications: Sample Roles and Responsibilities
1. Advise senior officers on communications issues both internally and externally, in relation to 
reputation management, media handling, stakeholder relations and public perceptions, especially 
related to sensitive issues. 
2. Lead on the development, delivery and evaluation of a corporate communication strategy to 
deliver activities that support organisational goals, increases public awareness of the LEA’s work, 
and enhances confidence in the LEA. 
3. Provide guidance and solutions for internal communications, consolidating communication 
processes and ensuring policing priorities are upheld. 
4. Ensure the provision of a 24/7 proactive and reactive information service by using the most 
appropriate channels to drive an open and transparent approach to communication. This includes 
using existing LEA-owned channels and developing new, innovative channels to deliver two-way 
communications activity and effective public campaigns about crime reduction and prevention.
5. Oversee all press and social media handling in support of the LEA’s operations to protect and 
build the LEA’s brand and visibility and contribute to achieving the force’s organisational goals.
6. Ensure officers and staff are equipped with the necessary media training, skills and support to 
deal directly with the media and social media where appropriate.
7. Develop and maintain strategic relationships with key stakeholders, both internally and externally 
in order to communicate policing priorities and support the delivery of the organisational goals.
The Importance of Policy & Joint Protocols
Experience in several countries shows the value of a memorandum of understanding 
between LEAs and media representative organisations. One example is an 
agreement between the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the South African 
National Editors’ Forum (SANEF). This sets out what each side may and may  
not do in relation to their engagements. Joint press statements show improved 
relations.140  Further, a Police Policy on communications such as Standing Order 156 
affirms how the SAPS deal with the media.141  
140   See SANEF. Joint Media Statement Issued by the South African Police Service and the South African National Edit. Available at:  
https:/ /sanef.org.za/joint_media_statement_issued_by_the_south_african_police_service_and_the_so/
141  SAPS. 2003. Standing Order (General) 156. https://static.pmg.org.za/151028r2k.pdf
100 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents3.8 Activities
The following activities enable trainers to: 
	` Determine whether participants’ level of knowledge on the importance of communicating with the 
public and the media has increased since the start of the module.
	` Assess whether participants now have a greater understanding of their digital environment.
	` Encourage participant to consider ways of using social media to engage with the public.
	` Encourage participants to look for ways to improve relations with the media.
	` Assess whether participants can create basic message structures.
3.8. 1 Activity – Digital Environment
Small groups may conduct the activity. The groups may discuss and select the 
answers, with one group member presenting the results of their group. Once the 
individual responses are made or group presentations are completed, the trainer 
should chair a debate between participants on their conclusions.
The purpose of this activity is for officers to discuss the utility of social media to serve their purposes in 
engaging with the public.
	` What social media channels are available to your LEA to use to communicate?
	` Is the LEA’s audience using those channels?
	` Which demographics (e.g. women, poor people) might not easily access the LEA’s social media?
	` How can the public be encouraged to seek information from the LEAs social media channels?
	` How can the public be encouraged to communicate with the LEA via those channels?
| 101
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 33.8.2 A) Activity – Message House
The trainer will create two to four groups. Flipcharts will be required for each group. 
Once the task is complete, a representative from each group will then present their 
work for critique by the other groups, chaired by the trainer.
Select a major, recent event in which the LEA was involved and gather news items that covered that 
event – articles, imagery, etc. The delegates are then to imagine that they are to prepare a spokesperson 
to conduct an interview just after the event. T o do so, they should be given time (30-45 minutes) to 
create a Message House to form a basis of the spokesperson’s interviews.
This is to be drawn on the flipcharts using the Message House diagram below. The instructor is to take 
time with each group to mentor them through the process.
Regarding Information and data, they may use real information and data from the event as provided by 
the news items, factual information and data that they know of or state a requirement to source specific 
information and data.
Information & Data Information & DataCommunication Objective:
Message
Supporting  
Theme 1Supporting  
Theme 2Supporting  
Theme 3
Information & Data
3.8.2 B) Activity – Net practice
This activity is conducted in pairs (or with a trio if an odd number). The trainer will briefly 
mentor all pairs during the exercise, moving between them. At the end of the practical 
exercise, selected pairs may conduct an ‘interview’ of two or three practiced questions 
in front of the entire group, and the interviewee responses critiqued. The number of 
‘interviews’ will depend on the time available.
Based upon the scenario and Message Houses produced in Activity 3.2A, pairs (or trios) should:
	` Identify worst questions and decide how to provide the best answer (WQBA).
	` Conduct ‘Net Practice’ – one participant acting as a journalist posing questions, the other as 
interviewee, practicing ABC in response. They should then swap over roles.
102 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents3.8.3 Activity – Media relations
The trainer will create two to four groups. Flipcharts will be required for each group. 
Once the task is complete, a representative from each group will then present his or 
her work for critique by the other group, chaired by the trainer.
The trainer should explain the following:
Your group has been tasked by senior leadership to improve relations between your LEA and local 
journalists.
List three methods by which you could realistically do this. For each method explain:
	` What would be your objective .
	` How  you would achieve that objective.
	` Why  you want to achieve objective.
	` What challenges  you might face:
| 103
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 3104 |
Module 3  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsT able of Contents
Key points | 107
4.1 Introduction | 108
4.2  Crisis Communications  | 109
4.2.1 Crisis phases | 110
4.2.2 Communicating in crisis | 113
4.3 Roles and Responsibilities | 115
4.3.1 Other requirements | 119
4.4 Specific Incidents and Circumstances | 121
4.4.1 T errorist attack | 122
4.4.2 Armed siege / hostage crisis | 124
4.4.3 Natural disasters | 126
4.4.4 Major incident or accident | 127
4.4.5 Threat to public health | 127
4.4.6 Use of force | 128
4.5 Activities | 130
4.5.1 Activity – Roles and responsibilities | 130
4.5.2 Activity – Media during crisis | 131Module 4
Communicating and  
facilitating coverage  
in public safety crises
| 105
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4Module aims
 `T o understand the principles of crisis 
communication with regards to LEAs.
 `T o appreciate the role of communication 
with the public and the media during crises.
 `T o recognise the phases of a crisis and 
what relevance they have for 
communications.
 `T o be able to map crisis communications 
within a generic response command 
structure.
 `T o be aware of the information 
requirements of the public and media 
during crises.
 `T o consider the different communications 
challenges in various types of crisis events.
106 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsKey points
	`An objective news media, during a time of often frenzied, crisis-driven and 
confused social media noise, is most likely to be where a concerned or even 
panicked public will go to seek vital information.
	`LEAs should consider news media journalists as a vital element, a major ‘force 
multiplier’, in their crisis response and make provisions to engage effectively with 
them, often in difficult practical circumstances for both.
	`Just as LEA command will follow a strategic/tactical/operational structure (or 
something similar), communications should also follow this structure, with specific 
communications roles at each level.
	`Media triage and family liaison are critical in high intensity crises where there have 
been casualties.
	`T errorist attacks, hostage crises, natural disasters, major incidents or accidents 
and threats to public health all require specific and nuanced communications 
approaches.
	`In times of heightened crisis and possibly panic, public order has the potential to 
break down and threaten public safety. In attempting to maintain order, and 
thereby protect life, LEAs may consider the use of force but only under very strict 
conditions.
	`During a crisis situation, any restrictions enforced by LEAs on the right to freedom 
of expression, should be sufficiently and reasonably justified, in accordance with 
Articles 19-3 and 20 of the ICCPR, and must comply with the three-part test 
(outlined in Module 1).
| 107
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 44. 1 Introduction
In certain environments, the main objective of LEAs and other responder agencies is first and foremost, 
public safety. Within that is the safety of responder personnel. Public safety may be threatened by 
violence or other factors. The involvement of LEAs in large scale national or international responses to 
circumstances such as war or transnational events is beyond the scope of this module. But localised 
responses, sometimes as a result of wider conditions, are relevant. The situations where this is the 
case may be:
	` T errorist attack
	` Armed siege / hostage crisis
	` Natural disaster
	` Major incident or accident
	` Threat to public health
Each of these can be seen as crisis conditions and should be responded to accordingly. Common 
denominators in these crisis situations are the needs not only for public safety but also for effective 
communications in order to enhance that public safety. LEAs have a major role in communicating with 
the public, either directly or, more commonly, through the media. 
Further, although social media can and should play a significant role in crisis communications, the 
traditional journalist is still of paramount importance. A professional news media, during a time of often 
frenzied, crisis-driven and confused social media noise, is most likely to be where a concerned or even 
panicked public will go to seek vital information. As such, LEAs must consider news media journalists 
a vital tool, a major ‘force multiplier’, in their crisis response and make provisions to engage effectively 
with them, often in difficult practical circumstances for both.
This module presents principles and practices based upon tried and tested protocols and structures 
of command. However, they are also based on systems in which there are trained communications 
officers, civilian or uniformed, employed within the LEA. It is appreciated that some LEAs may not 
have such staff specifically dedicated or trained for the functions that communications officers may 
perform. Further the command structure set out here is a generic model, not a prescriptive one, and 
should be seen as a template to be adapted as required. 
108 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents4.2 Crisis Communications
Along with police officers, doctors and nurses, journalists 
are the first responders, describing what is happening, 
supporting individuals and communities to understand 
what is going on and overall, over time, contributing to 
citizens’ preparedness, recovery, and resilience in the face  
of the crisis.”
Professor Verica Rupar, Auckland University of T echnology142 
Definition 
For LEAs, a crisis is defined as an event or issue that significantly affects, or threatens to significantly 
affect, the public adversely. This can range from an incident involving loss of life, such as a major 
disaster, through to events that significantly diminish public confidence or safety. Crises often require 
a multi-agency response. Of note, the principles and practices below are aimed at the lead responding 
organisation, which is often, but not necessarily, the LEA.
A crisis, in this context, does not include reputational crises created by an organisation’s or individual’s 
behaviour or performance, such as a scandal, unless such can be defined as above. 
Practical Principles
Rapid, effective and coordinated communications with the media and the public are critical elements 
of any crisis response. T o provide this, any communications functions should aim to follow the following 
general principles: 
	` T rained communication officers are employed within crisis response structures.
	` Primacy of communicating to maintain or regain public safety (even if reputational damage 
may occur).
	` The early release of a holding statement.
	` Identification and use of appropriate early spokespersons.
	` Ensuring only one official website or social media platform is used as the basis for all public 
information, with other agencies providing links from their own websites. 
	` The establishment of a Media Information Centre (MIC143 ) as a focal point for the media.
142  Rupar, V. 2019. Journalists as first responders. New Zealand Journal of Social Sciences. https:/ /www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1177083X.2020.17 41405
143   This is sometimes called a Joint Information Centre, Press Information Centre or other similar nomenclature but is essentially a physical space, commandeered or 
erected temporarily close to the incident or activity, where media relations can easily take place. If this cannot be done, a designated meeting point will suffice
| 109
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4	` The provision of regular media briefings / updates and the availability of an appropriate 
spokesperson at all times.
	` Providing the media with an appropriate vantage point at, or as close as possible to, the scene or 
issue (a media perimeter).
	` Providing media packs, with data, maps and background information. 
	` Working together with other agencies to ensure consistency of messages.
Discussion points:
	` Does your department practice those principles above?
	` Does your chain of command appreciate the primacy of communicating to maintain  
or regain public safety?
4.2. 1 Crisis phases
Steady-State
This is the normal everyday condition in which LEA communication activities continue as described in 
Module 3.
Pre-crisis Preparation
Communication strategies and protocols
There are many circumstances of crisis that can be reasonably foreseen, through what is sometimes 
called issue management or horizon-scanning. Any responsible LEA will have identified potential 
crises, will have pre-planned response protocols and will regularly exercise them. Within this, 
communication strategies and protocols may also be devised. This will involve senior management 
guidance, as all messages must be formulated towards a strategic objective. Although a degree of 
variance will occur depending on the circumstances of the crisis, and thereby the strategic objectives, 
message strategy should underpin all media engagements and generic templates should be written. 
This will require the amassing of data and information beforehand to support messages. This 
information has to be readily at hand and available to all officers who may be required to engage with 
the media at short notice. There should be an up-to-date contact list containing relevant contacts of 
communications personnel of all other emergency responders, from fire and rescue services to public 
health, and of local media.
Discussion points:
	` What specific incidents might you and your colleagues reasonably expect to face?
	` What has been done to prepare for them?
	` Does media and communications feature in any pre-planned responses?
110 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsMedia lines / lines-to-take
Not all crises are sudden. Good issue management, or horizon-scanning, should identify those issues 
that may gain media interest if escalated to a crisis situation. These can range from the potential 
for a major accident to terrorist attack to political instability. For each of these, as far as possible, 
comprehensive lines-to-take or media lines should be prepared, especially taking into account legal 
perspectives, organisation policies, factual data and assumptions. These should provide a generic 
initial media response template for each issue, providing clear statements surrounding areas of 
contention with legal or policy implications. Vital elements should include what is not  to be released, 
responses to likely questions and a soundbite. 
Lines should be prepared in order to provide an immediate response capability when there will be 
little luxury of time but a great demand for information. These should be further developed as the crisis 
unfolds.
Deployable capability
As personnel may deploy to required locations, it will be necessary to have pre-prepared ‘battle-
boxes’, within which all the needs of a deployed communication capability are held.
‘Battle-box’ contents:
	`Hardened case laptop
	`Hard (paper) copies – media contact lists, stakeholder contact lists, media log
	`Standard templates – media release, fact sheets, Lines-to-take
	`Press kits – branded folders, fact sheets
	`Satellite phone (enabled for highspeed data and voice)
	`Flipcharts
	`Video camera and editing software
	`Powerbanks (for mobile phones)
	`Projector and speakers
Some of this equipment may be placed in an incident response vehicle in advance.
| 111
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4Crisis Response
During any crisis event, there will be five stages that the LEA should undertake: 
	` Mobilise  – Following the reporting of an incident requiring response, the responders will mobilise 
to the incident site and response centres, as crisis response protocols. During mobilisation, the 
principle of cautious overreaction should be followed with respect to both internal and external 
resources that should be stood down if found to be in excess of requirements. 
	` Assess  – Once the responders are gathered at the site or in the nominated response centre, an 
assessment of the current status of events and potential escalation should be conducted. A lead 
response agency, often the LEA, will take charge.
	` Respond  – Based on the assessment, actions should be undertaken to mitigate escalation. Each 
officer and nominated agency teams should operate within the remit designated in crisis 
response protocols. 
	` Recover  – Often involving other agencies, this phase is largely concerned with efforts to return to 
normality (sometimes called ‘Business as usual’), having dealt with the immediate threat to public 
safety.
	` De-escalate  – De-escalation may be taken at different times by different responders, and it is 
important to take a clear decision when a responder agency is withdrawing and actions are being 
handed back to the lead agency to close out. 
Stand Down
A multi-agency decision will be taken as to when arrangements for the co-ordination of response 
to the media is no longer required. The emphasis will eventually switch from that of response phase 
to recovery phase. The responsibility for leading on responding to the media usually switches to the 
local/regional authority. It is important to have close co-operation between the lead agency and local/
regional authority in order to facilitate a seamless handover.
112 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents4.2.2 Communicating in crisis
The basic principles of communication as described in Module 3 apply equally in crisis situations. 
However, there are specifics that must also be considered. The public will have specific needs and 
wants with regards to communication, provided directly from the State (e.g., via the LEA or other 
responding agency) or indirectly via the media. 
In summary, the public needs:
	` basic details of the incident: what, where, when (and who, why and how, if possible); 
	` to know the implications for health and welfare; 
	` advice and guidance (e.g., stay indoors, symptoms, preparing for evacuation); 
	` reassurance (if necessary);
	` other practical implications, such as the effect on traffic, power supplies, telephones, water 
supplies, etc.; 
	` a helpline number; and 
	` information about what is being done to resolve the situation.
While the media will be a major source of information for the public and hence journalists should be 
enabled to report as efficiently as possible, LEAs may also directly communicate via social media and 
other more traditional channels. This communication may include:
	` Public service announcements (messages through local media, such as radio and television);
	` Mobilising officers on foot to knock on doors; 
	` From car or helicopter, by loudhailer or other amplified means; 
	` Loudspeaker announcements in public buildings, shopping centres, sports venues,  
transport systems, etc.; 
	` Automated telephone/fax/e-mail/text messages to subscribers; 
	` Electronic/variable message boards, e.g., at the roadside or on highways; 
	` Direct radio broadcasts to shipping (in maritime incidents); and
	` Site sirens.144 
Discussion points:
	` Can you think of other channels specific to your publics?
	` Who would you contact to set up public service announcements?
	` Do you have a subscription system for warnings and advice?
The crisis communication cycle mirrors the crisis cycle shown earlier, and communication and 
information requirements defined, shown below:
144   See GOV.U.K. Preparation and planning for emergencies, Warning and informing the public. https:/ /www.gov.uk/guidance/preparation-and-planning-for-emer -
gencies-the-capabilities-programme#warning-and-informing-the-public  (accessed August 2022)
| 113
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4Crisis Communication Cycle
Pre-Crisis Mobilise & Assess Respond Recover De-EscalateInformation Requirements  
(of the Public)	`What happened?
	`Where and when?
	`Who’s responsible?
	`Are we safe?
	`What are the 
consequences for 
myself and my family?
	`What’s being done to 
protect or help 
people?
	`Has anyone 
suffered?
	`Who are they?
	`What are you going to 
do about it?
	`Who’s in charge?
	`What’s going to 
happen next?	`What’s the risk to me?
	`What can I do to 
minimize my risk?
	`What should/can I do 
to help?
	`Why are you doing 
what you’re doing?
	`Why aren’t you doing 
more/differently?
	`Who should I listen 
to?
	`Who’s right?	`Why didn’t the 
response go better/
differently?
	`Who is to blame?
	`Who’s responsible for 
getting us back to 
normal?
	`Why is it taking so 
long to deal with this?
	`I’m not seeing this on 
the news anymore. 
Should I still care?
	`What are the 
long-term 
implications / 
consequences?	`How did the 
organization 
perform?
	`Should we rely on/
invest in the 
organization?Communication Requirements  
(of the LEA/Responding agency)	`Identify audiences.
	`Develop generic 
messages and 
materials.
	`Identify channels of 
communication.
	`Exercise the plan. 
	`Get approvals from 
legal, management, 
etc.
	`Build relationships 
with audiences and 
media.
	`Identify and train 
spokes people.
	`Ensure staff are 
aware of media 
policy.	`Acknowledge the 
event / issue with 
empathy (apply  
CAP – Concern, 
Action, Praise) 
rapidly.
	`Seek strategic 
guidance.
	`Explain and inform in 
simple terms. 
	`Establish your 
credibility.
	`Provide appropriate 
courses of action 
(including where and 
how to get more 
information).
	`Keep all stakeholders 
informed of events 
and communications.	`Help appropriate 
stakeholders 
accurately 
understand the 
impact of the situation 
and their risk.
	`Provide background 
and encompassing 
information to those 
who need to know.
	`Gain understanding 
of and support for 
response.
	`Monitor and analyse 
communications.
	`Correct 
misinformation.
	`Explain emergency 
recommendations  
(if any).	`Analyse the prevailing 
narrative.
	`Frame the narrative 
through proactive use 
of imagery.
	`Counter 
misconceptions.
	`Consider post-crisis 
media campaign.	`Improve future 
response by 
providing education 
about this response.
	`Examine and address 
problems and 
mishaps.
	`Reinforce what 
worked.
	`Persuade/build 
support for policy and 
resource allocation 
changes.
	`Promote the activities 
and capabilities of the 
agency.
 
114 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents4.3 Roles and Responsibilities
The information below applies to the response to a major incident involving direct threat to public safety 
and requiring a multi-agency response. It is a ‘worst-case’ scenario, but the concepts and principles 
may also be applied for more minor crises, in a more limited way.
Crisis Management Command Structure
LEAs are, by their nature, hierarchical organisations. From their leadership, through middle 
management to the officers on the street, such a top-down structure will be recognised by most; it is 
universal. This structure is maintained, if not strengthened, during crisis response. 
Strategic
(What to do)
T actical
(How to do it)
Operational
(Doing it)
Figure 4.1: T ypical command structure
The command structure during any crisis response will ordinarily be constructed along strategic, 
tactical and operational functional levels. Strategic command will be at a major headquarters, probably 
in a regional or national capital. T actical command will be as near to the incident site as practicable. 
Operational command will be at the incident location. In the initial phases of multi-agency crisis 
response, the initial response capability (police, fire, military) would effectively perform the function of 
operational command, before handover to the lead agency. 
| 115
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4Generic Multi Agency Command Structure:
Strategic Coordination Group (SCG)
	`sets the policy and direction for a response.
	`works with individual agency strategic command structures.
T actical Coordination Group
	`coordinates the delivery of a response in accordance with policy and direction 
agreed at the SCG.
	`works with individual agency tactical command structures.
Operational Level Emergency Management
	`physically provides the response on scene using the resources provided by 
each agency.
Media Handling / Communications Roles
Any crisis or emergency requires a number of specific roles to be fulfilled by communications 
professionals. Inevitably, the high-profile nature of any major incident means that the print, broadcast 
and digital media will constitute the predominant medium of information for most of the people affected 
by the incident.145  The ability to engage with these media will enhance the LEA’s ability to communicate 
with the public but to do so effectively requires human resources conducting several roles.
Initial / Lead Responder
Any major incident will be initially handled by a first-on-scene response agency, which will have ultimate 
authority and responsibility for responding. This responder will also have, initially, the lead for media 
relations, management and crisis communications as part of the warning and informing process. This 
responsibility may be handed over to another agency in the event of a crisis requiring a multi-agency 
response.
Discussion points:
	` In multi-agency emergency responses are you clear about the chains of command with 
regards to communications?
However, during the initial phases, the role of the initial responder organisation, in terms of media 
handling, will include:
	` Establishing communications functions at the strategic, tactical and operational levels;
	` Establishing procedures for contacting other relevant responder organisations, informing them of 
action already taken / proposed (procedures could involve creation of a physical media cell, 
organising conference calls/meetings, activation of the major emergency website, etc.);
	` Coordinating communications activity, to ensure consistency in messages being issued to the 
public via the media;
145   It is important for LEAs to be aware that journalists and media workers are often exposed to trauma as a result of covering sensitive situations of conflict and crises. 
They further lack adequate support to deal with the psychological impact of their work. For more information, see UNESCO. 2022. Safety of journalists covering 
trauma and distress ‘Do no harm’. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381200 , p.12
116 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents	` Providing a media facility;
	` Identifying an appropriate spokesperson to work with the media; 
	` Organising facilities for staff from different responder organizations to work together; and
	` Establishing and implementing procedures for handing over the role to another agency, as 
determined by the course of events.
Strategic Media Manager 
The nature and location of the incident will dictate who the strategic level communications manager 
will be. In a multi-agency response, more often than not, this will be a senior manager from within the 
lead agency communications department. 
Such a strategic media manager performs the following key roles: 
	` T o devise the overall media and communications strategy, in consultation with the strategic 
commander, and ratified by the overall strategic coordination group;
	` T o assist and advise in the identification of appropriate spokespeople prior to interviews/press 
conference, and liaise with the tactical press officer(s);
	` T o ensure partners and stakeholders are kept informed of communications and media activity; 
and
	` Ensure media coverage is monitored and any relevant issues are discussed, and that regular, 
accurate and up-to-date information is issued to media and other stakeholders. 
Strategic Spokesperson
In the event of a major incident, a strategic level spokesperson of appropriate seniority should be 
identified to undertake media interviews in order to reflect the severity of the situation and promote 
public reassurance. In identifying an appropriate spokesperson, it should be noted that consistency 
is key to reassuring the public and building confidence. In terms of seniority, starting at too high a level 
can create problems if your spokesperson then has very limited availability for subsequent media 
interviews. On the other hand, interviews with someone of a lower seniority could give the impression 
that the response operationally is being “scaled down” in importance.
Tactical Press Officer 
A press officer should be located with the tactical commander and, in the initial stages and prior to the 
setting up of strategic level capabilities, should co-ordinate information for release to the media, with 
the approval of the tactical commander. The tactical group tends to be located at the nearest police 
station, local authority building or other appropriate location, but fairly close to the actual scene (such 
as a village hall or school). 
The role of tactical communication manager/press officer will include:
	` Liaison with other press officers on formulating information being released;
	` Ensuring, in liaison with the strategic communications manager, that information is being 
circulated well, within both the media and other agency responders;
	` Be aware of all statements prior to them being released, monitor and provide details of media 
intelligence or coverage to strategic communications manager, including any speculation of 
inaccuracies; 
	` Keeping a log of all decisions made; and
	` T o identify, manage and task operational media officers at the scene, MIC or elsewhere.
| 117
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4 Operational Press Officer 
The operational press officer will usually be at the scene of an incident and may be the on-scene point 
of contact for journalists. 
The on-site operational media manager / press officer key roles are to:
	` Check accreditation of media at the scene (or establish an ad hoc mechanism for identifying 
journalists – e.g., checking business cards, identity documents – where there is no 
accreditation system in place). However, it must be noted that accreditation cannot be 
required of journalists wanting to report on events of public interest, except under special 
circumstances (see Module 5);
	` Manage a media meeting point; assist in identifying a suitable site; and ensure that details of the 
location are passed onto the media (this meeting point may be replaced by an MIC depending on 
the scale of the incident);
	` Organise briefing of the media at the scene, including briefing journalists of safety issues and 
limits of their incursion to an incident scene (which should be cordoned off for public safety);
	` Arrange for the initial / lead responder spokesperson to give regular media updates or interviews 
at the meeting point; and
	` Provide strategic and tactical levels with verifiable data and information from the scene, which can 
help provide additional factual detail for media releases. 
Operational Spokesperson
The media will need to speak with and interview an officer at the scene. This may be the operational 
press officer, but the preference is often for the operational commander as he or she will lend gravity 
to the engagement. Most modern LEAs will ensure that such personnel are trained in conducting 
interviews.
Discussion points:
	` During responses to incidents, do officers know how and who to refer the media to?
	` If not, how could this be rectified?
	` How would you characterise the different levels: strategic, tactic and operational in relation to 
communication with media? 
	` Would you have the capacity, in a crisis, to manage a large volume of calls specifically from the 
media?
	` If not, how could this be rectified?
118 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents4.3. 1 Other requirements
Depending upon the nature of the incident, there may be a number of other requirements that could be 
provided by LEA communications officers or other specialists, including:
	` Call Handlers  – It is important that the central press office (established by the lead agency at 
strategic or tactical levels) is staffed constantly during a crisis. Call handlers should: 
 –  Record details of all calls taken and responses given.
 –  Conduct media triage (see below).
 –  Ensure responses are coordinated and in line with current statements, as issued from strategic 
or tactical levels.
 –  Consult with tactical level press officers on any controversial or difficult questions and notify 
them of any issues requiring clarification.
 –  Identify intelligence and information to submit to tactical press officer(s).
 –  Ensure press releases are placed on appropriate website(s) / voicebank(s).
	` Media Monitoring  – Media monitoring is essential to ensure that the identified messages are 
being communicated to the public, and to enable any misinformation to be addressed. Those 
responsible for media monitoring should:
 –  Cover all media, including TV, radio, press, internet, social media, etc. 
 –  Identify inaccuracies and seek to correct them.
 –  Identify intelligence and information, and report this to tactical press officer(s).
 –  Consider questions being submitted by journalists and notify tactical press officer(s) of issues 
requiring clarification. 
 –  Ensure written summaries of media coverage are logged and communicated to strategic or 
tactical coordination groups.
	` Media T riage  – During a severe crisis, media representatives will all wish to speak with a point of 
contact or spokesperson at the LEA. The level of calls for media statements, interviews or 
information may become overwhelming, especially at the start of a crisis and even more so for 
small communications teams. A press conference can serve multiple media outlets all at once, 
but, before one can be arranged, it is better to serve those media outlets that can best assist in 
helping achieve operational goals, in other words, those that can reach those publics that the LEA 
most needs to communicate with. It can be tempting to arrange interviews with ‘big hitters’ like 
national or even international media but your public might be better served through more local 
media. Therefore, a degree of triage may be required, deciding which media outlets should be 
dealt with and served first.
 Communication officers, or call handlers, should log calls in a manner that records:
 –  Time of call
 –  Name of caller / journalist
 –  Contact number and e-mail
 –  What type of media – global, national, regional, local, television, print, radio, newswires or online
 –  T ype of request – interview, background, update, subject matter expert, statement
 –  Deadline times for media
| 119
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4Then, triage can be conducted by a communications officer who knows the media landscape, 
separating requests into the following priority levels:
A High: arrange request to be dealt with as soon as possible.
B Medium: arrange request to be dealt with when possible.
C Low: place on media contact list for updates and advisory for press conference.
Discussion points:
	` If you were dealing with a local incident and needed to communicate with the local public via 
the media, do you know which media outlets would be best?
	` Do you have their contact details available?
If necessary, when an LEA’s communications resources cannot handle a large number of journalists, 
a media or press pool may be suggested, whereby a limited number of journalists and media crews 
represent a larger spectrum of media outlets for the purposes of gathering and sharing material. However, 
while an LEA can offer this, it is up to the media outlets to organise who would be part of the pool.
	` Media Packs  – Relevant written information, including maps, biographies, background 
information, should be compiled into media packs for distribution.
	` Logistics  – LEAs should ensure that there are adequate resources to provide the required 
communications response, ensuring staff have sufficient rest periods and refreshments, can seek 
mutual aid, are provided with appropriate equipment and administrative support. Records of 
hours worked should be kept and monitored. If an MIC is established, more significant logistics 
support may be required. 
	` Internal Communications  – LEAs should ensure that internal staff and stakeholders are kept 
informed of the media strategy and its implementation.
	` Images  – Photography or imaging created in house may be provided to the media, with approval 
of tactical press officer(s). 
	` Family/Victim Liaison  – The needs and involvement of families of victims in media outreach 
should be considered. LEAs may need to coordinate statements and interviews with them as 
appropriate. This could involve a press officer being based at a casualty bureau, identifying 
potential interviewees for the media to provide some human interest stories. If media interest in 
victims’ families become intrusive,146  even verging on harassment, then LEAs may offer ‘media 
shielding’ whereby officers may limit access to victims’ families, homes and property. A strong 
relationship between LEA communications officers and Family Liaison officers is vital.147 
Discussion points:
	` How does your LEA keep its officers informed of official media strategy?
	` What is the danger of not keeping them informed?
146  UNESCO. 2022. Safety of journalists covering trauma and distress ‘Do no harm’. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381200 , p.2 
147   This issue around the requirements of Family Liaison Officers in the face of intense media interest was highlighted in the Kerslake report on the response to the 
Manchester (UK) Arena bombing in May 2017. See Kerslake Arena Review. 2018. The Kerslake Report  
http:/ /kerslakearenareview.co.uk/media/1022/kerslake_arena_review_printed_final.pdf , p. 201-202
120 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents4.4 Specific Incidents and Circumstances
In crisis and disaster situations the accuracy, scope, 
credibility and timeliness of media information depend on 
relationships between journalists and emergency managers. 
In the chaos of an unfolding disaster this relationship relies 
heavily on trust.”
When minutes count: T ension and trust in the relationship between emergency managers and the media148 
Note that, in the incidents and circumstances shown below, there may well be multiple agencies 
involved – fire brigades, ambulance services, military, public health authorities, specialist agencies – 
and often involving different levels of command and perspective – from national government down to 
operational actors on-scene. It is important that the swift and effective coordination of communication 
is carried out, with a lead responder, often but not always the LEA, taking charge at strategic and 
tactical levels. 
Emergency Powers
As stated in Module 1, long-term protracted crises may be judged to require the invocation of 
emergency powers or state of emergency. These powers are designed to bypass democratic rights 
in order to combat serious, possibly existential, threats to the State’s functioning. During the COVID-19 
pandemic, many states invoked such powers in the name of public safety, with significant impacts 
on human rights, not least the right to freedom of expression. Many states of emergency have been 
temporary; however, there is evidence that states of emergency circumvent democratic processes in 
ways that might promote democratic decline.149 
LEAs are instrumental in enforcing extended laws under states of emergency and must follow such 
laws. However, these laws are often enacted rapidly and without adequate training and understanding 
of them by those enforcing them. The officer on the ground, sometimes exercising discretion in 
conducting his or her duties, must be fully cognisant of the basis, reasoning and intention of such 
emergency laws, in order not to unnecessarily and idly enforce restrictions.
Any restrictions enforced by LEAs on the right to freedom of expression, should be sufficiently and 
reasonably justified, in accordance with Articles 19-3 and 20 of the ICCPR, and must comply with the 
three-part test (see Module 1).
148   McLean, H. and Power, M.R. 2013. When minutes count: Tension and trust in the relationship between emergency managers and the media.  
https:/ /journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177 /1464884913480873
149   Luhrmann, A. & Rooney, B. 2021. Autocratization by Decree: States of Emergency and Democratic Decline  
https:/ /www.ingentaconnect.com/content/cuny/cp/2021/00000053/00000004/art00004;jsessionid=30b3j1njh205t.x-ic-live-03
| 121
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4Discussion points:
	` Have you had to enforce ‘new’ laws under a state of emergency?
	` If so, were you fully briefed on these laws, specifically the scope and limitations of them?
Armed Conflicts
Many states are involved in various levels of armed conflict in which violent acts are carried out upon 
the public, to which LEAs have to respond. As with any other crisis, the media have a vital role to 
play in informing the public. Journalists therefore are often in close proximity to dangerous events  
and combatants.
Rule 34 of International Committee of the Red Cross’s (ICRC) study of customary international 
humanitarian law, which encompasses the Geneva Conventions, makes clear that civilian journalists 
engaged in professional missions in areas of armed conflict must be respected and protected as long 
as they are not taking a direct part in hostilities. Of note, such civilian journalists are not to be confused 
with “war correspondents”, who accompany the armed forces of a State without being members. The 
latter also remain civilians but are entitled to prisoner-of-war status upon capture.150 
4.4. 1 T errorist attack
The suddenness and locality of a terrorist attack require rapid but clear LEA communication with 
the public and media. Further, unlike with disasters, the LEA is most likely to be the primary agency 
who people will turn to for information in terrorist attacks. This is often complicated by the fact that 
there is always the possibility of a follow-up attack aimed at first responders, including LEA officers, 
and that terror groups will often also be communicating on social media during the response, fuelling 
rumours and confusion. The latter makes it crucial for the LEA to be seen as a trusted source and to 
communicate clearly and quickly, enabling the media to amplify their messages.
Although precise guidelines for any response to a terrorist attack will depend on the specific 
circumstance, there are some general common points of instruction.151 
Many journalists are well aware of the difficulties and dilemmas of reporting terrorism, and often 
recognise the need for restraint. Any LEA officers involved in counter-terrorism, especially from a 
communications angle, should acquaint themselves with how journalists do and should approach 
these issues.152 
For the media, restraint is a crucial issue, because the 
impact of terrorism increases with such rumours and false 
news, distracting the police from urgent tasks and sparking 
confusion and fear within the population.” 153 
150   See ICRC’s IHL Database: https:/ /ihl-databases.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/v1_rul_rule34 . Other instruments and excerpts from military manuals can be 
seen at: https:/ /ihl-databases.icrc.org/customary-ihl/eng/docs/v2_rul_rule34
151   For recommendations on LEA response during and after terror events, see, Crime & Security Research Institute, Cardiff University. 2018. From Minutes to Months: 
A rapid evidence assessment of the impact of media and social media during and after terror events. https://static1.squarespace.com/static/57875c16197ae -
a2902e3820e/t/5bc74f950d929708f7733b3c/1539788716177/M2M+Report+%5BFinal%5D.pdf , p. 12
152  A good reader is UNESCO. 2017. Terrorism and the media: a handbook for journalists. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000024707 4
153  Ibid, p.46
122 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsCase Study –  Interplay between journalists and social  
media during a terrorist attack
In 2011, Norway had one of the greatest internet and mobile phone usage per capita in the 
world. Yet, on 22 July 2011, a major terrorist bomb attack in Oslo followed by a mass shooting 
on Utoya island showed that the police and emergency services had not taken steps to 
ensure they could leverage social media during a crisis. Responders relied upon phone calls, 
were unaware of the intelligence picture being developed by those under siege on the island, 
through their Facebook and T witter feeds, and failed to fully use social media to inform and 
warn the wider public. 
A comprehensive review and report by the Norwegian government, known as the Gjorv report, 
highlighted these many failings and since then the police have taken great strides to improve 
their digital capabilities. These are wide ranging but of note, include an increased interplay 
between news media and police intelligence – journalists are, by nature, avid information 
curators and also opinion leaders on social media. By LEAs working with social media-savvy 
journalists, a two-way flow of information can be highly beneficial to both. This also improves 
the ability to communicate with the public, as although social media does have a significant 
impact in the public’s crisis communication, research clearly points out how traditional news 
media, including their online editions, still have the key role in crises. It is through daily news 
media, radio and television that most people are alerted and informed.154 
Case Study – Manchester
A U K police officer was stabbed to death by a terrorist during a counter-terrorism operation at 
premises in Manchester in 2003. Three other officers were injured during the incident. Given 
the terrorist involvement in the murder, and the fact that they were police officers injured in the 
course of their duty, media interest in the story was enormous and international. 
In order to mitigate the impact of the large amount of media interest on the officers’ families, a 
significant amount of media management was arranged by those managing the aftermath of 
the incident and the subsequent investigation.
1.    A media liaison officer was dispatched to the scene and also one to the hospital the 
officers were taken to for treatment. They were able to answer journalists’ questions at 
both locations and provide updates on the officers’ injuries.
2.  At the scene, a media cordon was established that allowed the media to film the outside of 
the premises but, protected the details of the inside of the premises and the layout of the 
murder scene.
3.  All officers were named in the immediate aftermath of the incident, but the media were 
asked not to approach them, or their families directly. 
4.  Photographs of the murdered officer were obtained from his family and issued to 
journalists by the police, along with a statement from his widow, a family photo and names 
and ages of his children.
5.  Photographs of the surviving officers were not issued because they were members of the 
counter-terrorism unit and therefore at increased risk.
154   Hornmoen, H. and Måseide, P .H., 2018. Social Media in Management of the Terror Crisis in Norway: Experiences and Lessons Learned  
https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/978-1-78756-269-120181009/full/html
| 123
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 46.  Interviews were facilitated with other officers who were not at risk, but who could talk 
authoritatively and offer reassurance to the community (for example the Chief Constable 
and community liaison officers).
7 .  Throughout the investigation and subsequent trial, all media interviews with the victim’s 
next-of-kin were pooled and distributed to all the media, to reduce the impact of media 
demands on them.
8.  Journalists were given named points of contact throughout the duration of the 
investigation and subse quent trial to provide consistency and build relations.155 
4.4.2 Armed siege / hostage crisis
These situations are possibly the most complex in terms of working with the media towards a positive 
solution. Presence of media on-scene is deemed to have a high level of influence on negotiations in 
hostage situations, and hostage takers may also wish to engage the media to achieve their aims.
A strong understanding between the LEA and the media will be critical during such tense events. All 
means should be employed to ensure the media are provided with information while also, and arguably 
more importantly, limiting that information and media activity to keep hostages safe. T o some, this 
may appear a violation of the right to freedom of expression and the media, but this practice does in 
fact pass the three-step test, in that it is lawful, legitimate (public safety and protection of the rights of 
others) and necessary and proportionate. 
Despite ordinarily adopting an open and transparent approach to providing journalists with 
information, the LEA must proceed with caution in hostage / siege scenarios. The hostage taker(s) 
may have access, either directly or indirectly to media reporting of the incident; it is likely that by means 
of modern devices they will have a direct means of communicating with the public beyond the location 
of the incident, as well as access to live video streaming and the internet. 
It is imperative to the on-going safety of any hostage(s) and to achieve a peaceful resolution to the 
incident that police media releases accord with the current negotiating strategy. It is good practice that 
all media releases are first seen and assessed by the negotiating team before release. A failure to do so 
will have the potential to heighten tension and escalate harm.156 
Further, while closely controlling information to journalists, LEAs should encourage, rather than 
enforce, restrained and accurate reporting from journalists. In this, it is hugely advantageous if a trained 
LEA communications officer, potentially at a temporary MIC, acts as a liaison and can advise and brief 
the media.
Seasoned journalists may be well aware of this kind of advice, but many may not. While self-restraint 
may be required and indeed exercised in many cases, debate is often sparked over where this 
becomes self-censorship.
155  Greater Manchester Police. 2003, Policy Record for Head of Communications (January 2003)
156   For an example of Hostage and Crisis Negotiators Policy, including Media Strategy, see  
https:/ /www.sussex.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/foi-media/sussex/policies/hostage-and-crisis-negotiators-policy-surrey-and-sussex-1178.pdf
124 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsCase Study – Police and Media Cooperation – Belgium 2015
On 22 November 2015, only days after coordinated terrorist attacks in Paris killed 130 people, 
the Belgian police launched a major counter-terrorist operation in the Brussels suburb of 
Molenbeek to locate the suspected planners. The police requested that the media go silent 
during the operation. The media complied and instead ran photos of cats on their websites 
until it was considered safe to report on the raids. 
“Restricting the live coverage of police operations is considered legitimate as long as they do 
not constitute an act of news censorship,” Jean-François Dumont, deputy general secretary 
of the Belgian Association of Professional Journalists, said. 
However, the police made no attempt to restrict media access and Belgian journalists 
remained on the scene to continue filming without broadcasting live or posting online precise 
details on the location of the raids. But a few hours later, after the operation was completed, 
they provided full coverage of the events. 
This could be seen as an example of the authorities and the media cooperating towards 
achieving a public service, in conditions where public safety was a major concern.157 
Separate from working with the media, as part of the LEAs communications function, social media 
monitoring is fundamental to contemporary hostage situations for two main reasons:
	` T o gather background information on the hostage taker(s); and 
	` T o monitor any communications made by the hostage taker(s) via social media channels.
Discussion points:
	` Do your hostage negotiators have an LEA point of contact to handle media issues?
	` In your experience, do the media understand the need to report professionally and ethically 
so as to reduce the threat to life?
	` If not, how could you change this?
157  CPJ. 2017. Self-Restraint vs. Self-Censorship. https:/ /cpj.org/2017 /04/self-restraint-vs-self-censorship/
| 125
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 44.4.3 Natural disasters
Unlike attacks or major unforeseen incidents, to a degree, natural disasters can often be forewarned 
in advance, especially weather events, so may allow for some preparedness. This will require 
communication with the public. 
Also, unlike sudden contained events, natural disasters may be very large scale and have a significant 
effect on communication infrastructure, and traditional media themselves may also be limited in their 
capabilities.
If there is some warning of the hazard, then public information and warning will be vital to mitigate its 
effect. Emerging good practice in providing such calls for: 
	` A clear title of the warning notification.
	` Who is issuing the warning and date/time of issue.
	` A clear call-to-action as to what is required of the public – e.g., evacuate (if so, how), stay indoors, 
avoid an area.
	` The type of threat and how likely it is to occur, with a short description. 
	` An explanation of the expected impacts and consequences, including detail on the specific 
communities at risk and expected time of impact.
	` Where and how to get more information (if there is a possibility of power outages it is 
recommended that the public is advised to, where possible, have batteries for portable radios).
	` When to expect the next update (as appropriate).
	` Further advice on action people should take, described as specifically and succinctly as possible.
	` General information if relevant, including how emergency services are responding. 
Warnings are more effective when they are widely shared. This requires that the construction and 
publishing of a warning allows for easy sharing and retains its integrity. Warning providers should aim 
for key messages and essential links to be easily retained, shared and used by others. 
Although social media will be an important element, prior to a disaster, the media will be a primary 
channel for information and should be engaged and briefed early. However, ensuring public safety also 
relies on the avoidance of panic, and information release to the media may have to be moderated to 
avoid widespread alarm. Such decisions on what to release should lie with senior strategic leadership, 
not with LEA communications officers.
The manner in which LEAs and other agencies may be able to communicate with the public after 
the disaster has struck will depend on what channels are available. Radio is one of the more resilient 
types of media and may have to be prioritised. Of note, any media that have a direct capability to 
assist the public affected should take precedence over international media. Procedures, such as the 
establishment of an MIC and recommended communications command structures, are as detailed in 
the earlier parts of this module.
Discussion points:
	` Do you have contacts of communications officers in other emergency responder agencies?
	` Does your LEA regularly exercise, including the communications element, with other 
emergency responder agencies?
126 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents4.4.4 Major incident or accident
The response in these cases is similar to that for disaster but with no warning and in most cases is more 
localised. The rapid establishment of an MIC or media perimeter as near as safely possible to the site of 
the incident or accident is vital. The media will want to be in as close proximity as possible and will take 
measures to get there anyway, so the positioning of the MIC is important.
In these cases, public outrage regarding why the incident or accident occurred is often generated 
quickly and the media may respond to that, even feed it. It is important for the LEA and other responders 
not to be dragged into this ‘blame-game’. Communications with the media and public must remain 
focussed on the objective of public safety not public outrage.
4.4.5 Threat to public health
Expression was the biggest human rights casualty of the 
pandemic: two-thirds of the world’s states put restrictions 
on media; many countries implemented states of emergency 
that were counter to human rights standards; and the flow 
of information came under tight control, as many 
governments took more interest in controlling the 
narrative around the pandemic than controlling the 
pandemic itself.”
The Global Expression Report 2021: The state of freedom of expression around the world158 
The response in this case is largely as for a forewarned natural disaster, providing warnings and advice 
to the public via several mechanisms including the media. However, the threat itself is often unseen 
and the public may be asked to take counter-intuitive actions, which may be hard to carry out or seen 
as detrimental to the individual. The messaging may thus have to be comprehensive and complex to 
encourage needed behavioural change. This is largely the responsibility of public health authorities, 
and this is where the media will tend to focus. However, LEAs may be required to support those 
messages, encourage public compliance or enforce emergency health-focussed laws. Indeed, a 
public health crisis could become an issue of public order, which is covered in Module 5.
The communication of LEAs has been seen by citizens as a major issue during the COVID-19 
pandemic. When severe restrictions have been placed on the public and when access to government 
authorities is limited, LEAs quickly become the primary public contact point with the public. In a situation 
when societal norms and rights have been altered, officers are often required to communicate these 
changes at a personal face-to-face level. In such circumstances, confusion over LEAs’ responsibilities 
can cause significant difficulties.
158  Article19. 2021. The Global Expression Report 2021. The Global Expression Report 2021: The state of freedom of expression around the world , p.13
| 127
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4For the public and police alike, the question of what exactly 
the ‘rules and expectations’ are when applied at the 
individual level is a difficult one to answer with any form 
of consensus…For the police, this issue is compounded by 
the fact that it is they who are tasked with arbitrating 
lockdown restrictions, with the constant threat of 
‘misreading’ the situation impeding their ability to do so 
through fear of repercussion.” 159 
It is therefore vital that LEAs ensure that they are 
	` fully and comprehensively briefed on any guidelines and regulations that they may be required to 
encourage or enforce; and 
	` briefed on how to communicate these in an understandable, professional and courteous manner 
to members of the public and, if needed, the media.
Discussion points:
	` During the pandemic, were LEA officers effectively briefed to communicate with the public?
	` What were, or should have been, the main points to communicate?
4.4.6 Use of force
In times of heightened crisis and possibly panic, public order has the potential to break down and 
threaten public safety. In attempting to maintain order, and thereby protect life, LEAs may consider the 
use of force but only under very strict conditions.
From the UN’s ‘Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials’:160 
 Special Provisions
  9.  Law enforcement officials shall not use firearms against persons except in self-defence 
or defence of others against the imminent threat of death or serious injury, to prevent the 
perpetration of a particularly serious crime involving grave threat to life, to arrest a person 
presenting such a danger and resisting their authority, or to prevent his or her escape, and only 
when less extreme means are insufficient to achieve these objectives. In any event, intentional 
lethal use of firearms may only be made when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
   In no circumstances should journalists be subject specifically to the use of force unless this 
Provision applies.
159   Ghaemmaghami, A, et al. 2021. Responding to the Public during a Pandemic: Perceptions of ‘Satisfactory’ and ‘Unsatisfactory’ Policing, Policing: A Journal of Policy 
and Practice. https:/ /academic.oup.com/policing/advance-article/doi/10.1093/police/paab058/6364864 , p.10
160   OHCHR. 1990. Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials  
https:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/useofforceandfirearms.aspx
128 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents General Provisions
  5. Whenever the lawful use of force and firearms is unavoidable, law enforcement officials shall: 
   (a)  Exercise restraint in such use and act in proportion to the seriousness of the offence and the 
legitimate objective to be achieved; 
   (b)  Minimize damage and injury, and respect and preserve human life; 
   (c)  Ensure that assistance and medical aid are rendered to any injured or affected persons at 
the earliest possible moment; 
   (d)  Ensure that relatives or close friends of the injured or affected person are notified at the 
earliest possible moment.
The use of force regarding dispersal of assemblies and journalists is covered in Module 5.
| 129
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 44.5 Activities
The following activities enable trainers to: 
	` Assess whether participants have understood the fundamentals of crisis communications 
applicable to LEAs.
	` Determine the participants’ levels of understanding of public information and organisational 
communication requirements during crises.
	` Encourage participants to examine their organisation’s capability to communicate effectively 
during a crisis.
	` Assess the participants’ understanding of the need to work with the media during crises.
	` Evaluate the participants’ understanding of how different crisis events or circumstances affect 
communications.
4.5. 1 Activity – Roles and responsibilities
Three groups are required to conduct the activity, which is largely role play. These 
groups may discuss their assigned role, with one group member representing their 
group in the plenary session. The trainer should chair the plenary.
Select a major crisis event, within the jurisdiction of the LEA (i.e., with the national boundary) that 
threatened public safety and/or involved casualties and fatalities, and gather news items which 
covered that event – articles, imagery, etc. 
The groups are to be given specific levels of responsibility – strategic, tactical and operational. They 
are to consider themselves a communications team at their respective level, based at national LEA 
headquarters (strategic), at a local location a safe distance from the event (tactical), and at the scene of 
the event (operational).
Part 1. Without referring back to the relevant sections in this module, each group is to hypothetically * 
consider the following:
	` What is your team’s primary roles?
	` How would you carry them out?
	` Who would you need to be in contact with, externally and internally?
	` How would you source critical information?
	` How would you coordinate information release with others involved (other levels and other 
agencies)?
	` What are the specific communications issues relevant to your level and the nature of the crisis 
event?
	` What will the media need from your level?
* If there is practical experience within the group, input is to be encouraged
130 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThe trainer is to periodically mentor each group and then chair a plenary session, requesting each 
group to brief on their results.
Trainer notes: If the LEA already has comprehensive multi-level crisis communication protocols, then 
this should be a straightforward task.
The trainer is to play a red team role as the ‘media’, questioning the responses of the groups to 
adequately provide timely and accurate information. This is to enable the groups to appreciate the 
need for effective coordination of media relations between the strategic, tactical and operational levels.
The trainer is to encourage groups to question and critique each other, notably around inevitable 
overlaps and assumptions made about each levels’ roles and coordination. A degree of discord is to 
be expected and even promoted by the trainer, reflecting the realities of a crisis situation.
4.5.2 Activity – Media during crisis
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions, with 
one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group presentations 
are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants on their 
conclusions.
Using the same real scenario as Activity 4.1 but without any news items which covered that event, the 
groups are to role play the media, and consider the following:
As a journalist:
	` How can I get information on the event quickly?
	` Who is the most credible source?
	` How do I know who to contact in the responder agencies?
	` How will I know if and when there is a press conference?
	` How can I get the best imagery?
	` All my competitors are covering this event. What’s my story and how do I make it stand out?
The trainer is to periodically mentor each group and then chair a plenary session, requesting each 
group to brief on their results followed by a discussion on the following questions:
Knowing the media’s needs, 
	` What could and should an LEA do to assist the media? 
	` What could and should prevent an LEA from doing so?
| 131
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 4132 |
Module 4  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsT able of Contents
Key points | 135
5.1 Introduction | 136
5.2 Public Assembly | 139
5.2.1 Working with the media | 139
5.2.2 Security and safety of journalists | 141
5.2.3 Notification | 144
5.2.4  Engagement with stakeholders  | 144
5.2.5 Monitoring of and reporting on protests | 145
5.3 Elections | 148
5.3.1 The Electoral Cycle | 149
5.3.2   Collaborating with Electoral Management Bodies (EMBs)  | 151
5.3.3  Conflict during elections  | 153
5.4 Activities  | 154
5.4.1 Activity – The Rights of Journalists in a Protest | 154
5.4.2 Activity – Protecting Journalists during a Protest | 154Module 5
Communicating and  
facilitating coverage of  
political events and elections
| 133
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5Module aims
 `T o understand the State’s duties in 
facilitating coverage of political events  
and elections.
 `T o understand the role and extended  
rights of journalists in providing effective 
coverage and monitoring of the  
democratic process. 
 `T o know the role of LEAs when interacting 
with and protecting journalists during 
protests, riots and demonstrations.
 `T o understand and apply the Electoral 
Cycle to aid the planning of security 
operations in order to help facilitate and 
protect the media.
 `T o understand the role of EMBs and 
Electoral Practitioners. 
 `T o understand operational Safety 
Procedures when dealing with Media.
134 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsKey points
	`States have an obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the right to protest.
	` A good working relationship between LEAs and media outlets most likely to cover 
gatherings can be mutually beneficial. 
	` LEAs are increasingly having to balance the need to maintain public order and 
safety with the right to freedom of expression, press freedom and the right to 
assembly, whilst ensuring that journalists can report on events safely and 
unimpeded.
	` Even if the legal status of a demonstration or assembly is unsanctioned, reporting 
on them is not. LEAs should not use any form of obstruction, force or pressure 
against journalists and their equipment.
	` During elections it is vital for LEAs to remain neutral and demonstrate this neutrality 
through their communication, behaviour and the arrangements they put in place 
through the various stages before, during and after an election. 
	` LEAs should work with Electoral Management Bodies (EMBs) throughout the 
electoral cycle, and not just in the run-up to elections.
	` Particular attention should be devoted to specific threats and risks that women 
journalists face in the exercise of their work, and it is important to take a gender-
sensitive approach when considering measures to address the safety of 
journalists, including online.
| 135
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 55. 1 Introduction
Unquestionably, the police have a duty to uphold public order, 
to protect people and property and to safeguard rights. This 
does not mean that police should be blind to their primary 
duty to facilitate public assembly, including peaceful protests.” 
A brief introduction to policing public gatherings: A guide for practitioners161 
In its General Comment No. 37 on Article 21 on Right of peaceful assembly, the UN Human Rights 
Committee stated that people have the right to demonstrate peacefully and states should respect 
international law and let them do so.162 
Allowing people to assemble and act collectively to air their grievances and views through peaceful 
protests is a mark of how committed a state is to upholding the rule of law, and enabling a transparent, 
open and democratic society. Alongside elections, such gatherings can make a positive contribution 
to the development of participatory governance, holding governments accountable and raising 
awareness to create change in generally held attitudes, policy and laws.163 
The term ‘Fourth Estate’ refers to the independence of the press and news media from government. 
However, journalists usually have no more special status or legal rights to access and publish 
information than the general public. The media act as the ears and eyes of the public and the ability of 
a free press to report these debates and activities is regarded as essential to the democratic process. 
National LEAs have to balance protecting fundamental human rights and supporting the participatory 
process without discrimination, whilst ensuring a safe and orderly environment within which they can 
be enjoyed.
161   Boyle, Michael, and Jean-Claude Vullierme. 2021. A brief introduction to policing public gatherings: A guide for practitioners (CoE)  
https:/ /rm.coe.int/a-brief-introduction-to-policing-public-assemblies/1680a1aaf3
162   UN News, 29 July 2020. How do you define lawful peaceful protest? The UN Human Rights Committee has a clear answer  
https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/07/1069211
163   OHCHR. 2016. A/HRC/31/66  
https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2FHRC%2F31%2F66&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False
136 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThe right of peaceful assembly shall be recognized. No 
restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other 
than those imposed in conformity with the law and which are 
necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national 
security or public safety, public order (ordre public), the 
protection of public health or morals or the protection of the 
rights and freedoms of others.”
Article 21, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 16/12/1966164 
Non-violent conflict resolution is a key part of the democratic process. Political events such as rallies, 
marches, protests, elections or referendums are the means by which the public can gather and 
lawfully express their views and exert political pressure on governments to effect policy change.165  
They can also be used to maintain the status quo. 
The COVID-19 pandemic coincided with a rise in protests across the world166  despite lockdowns and 
other government-imposed restrictions. Significant protests were experienced in 110167  countries. 
In addition to pandemic-related concerns, many of today’s protesters are challenging perceived 
infringements of civil liberties and calling for a fairer economy.
The Right to Protest
States h ave an obligation to: 
a)  Respect the right to protest: They should not prevent, hinder or restrict the right 
to protest except to the extent allowed by international human rights law; 
b)  Protect the right to protest: They should undertake reasonable steps to protect 
those who want to exercise their right to protest. This includes adopting 
measures necessary to prevent violations by third parties; and 
c)  Fulfil the right to protest: They should establish an enabling environment for the 
full enjoyment of right to protest. This includes providing effective remedies for 
violations of all human rights embodied in the right to protest. 
In their constitutional provisions (or their equivalents) and in their domestic 
legislation, states should recognise and give effect to the indivisible, interdependent 
and interconnected human rights embodied in the right to protest, in accordance 
with international human rights law. These should include:
164  OHCHR. 1966. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. https:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx
165  UN. 2020. General comment no. 37 (2020) on the right of peaceful assembly (article 21) : Human Rights Committee. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/3884725
166  For data see The Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED): https:/ /acleddata.com/#/dashboard
167   Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 2021. Global Protest Tracker. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace  
https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/publications/interactive/protest-tracker#  
| 137
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5Rights essential to the exercise of protests, in particular: 
i.  The right to freedom of expression: The freedom to seek, receive and impart 
information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing 
or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his or her choice; 
ii.  The right to freedom of assembly: The freedom to intentionally gather in a space 
for a common expressive purpose; 
iii.  The right to freedom of association: The freedom to associate with others, 
including to form and join trade unions for the protection of individual and 
collective interests; 
iv.  The right to public participation: The right of everyone to, inter alia, take part in the 
cond uct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives.168  
Discussion points
	`  What do you understand about the right to protest?
	`  Identify some of the key issues that people are protesting about in your region. 
	` What form have they taken, e.g., march, gathering, rally?
	`  How do your law enforcement agencies deal with them? What do you think could be 
improved? 
168   Article19.org. 2016. The Right to Protest: Principles of the Protection of human rights in protests  
https:/ /www.article19.org/data/files/medialibrary/38581/Right_to_protest_principles_final.pdf
138 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents5.2 Public Assembly
5.2. 1 Working with the media
The media tend to regard security agencies as over-stating 
their importance and interest in enforcing public order and 
protecting national security. Many in the media sector believe 
that the concern expressed by security agencies over these 
issues are mere excuses to justify their tendency to violate the 
rights of citizens and the media, including the right to 
freedom of expression and media freedom.” 
Edetaen Ojo, Executive Director, Media Rights Agenda (MRA), Nigeria169 
The media are a vital communication channel to the public and journalists have the right to cover any 
form of public assembly, irrespective of its legal status.170 
As per OSCE’s Special Report on Handling of the Media During Public Assemblies,
Even in cases where the assembly could be regarded as illegal, 
the reporting on the event, and possible actions by 
government authorities, never is. Journalists who decide to 
cover such “unsanctioned” assemblies should be afforded the 
same treatment and protection by LEAs as those given to 
them during other public assemblies.” 171 
169   Betz, Michelle. 2018. Strengthening police and media relations for the safety of journalists and peaceful, free and fair elections in West Africa  
https:/ /www.mediasupport.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/2758-Police_media_relations.final_web.pdf , p.6
170  OSCE. 2020. Handling of the Media During Public Assemblies. https://www.osce.org/files/f/documents/2/f/467892.pdf , p.6
171  Ibid
| 139
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5Therefore, a good working relationship between LEAs and key media outlets most likely to cover 
gatherings can be mutually beneficial. Investing in resources and training to develop and maintain 
positive relationships with the media enable LEAs to: 
	` Demonstrate transparency. 
	` Establish clear operational rules.
	` Provide assistance.
	` Ensure the messages you want to highlight are disseminated to a wide audience, e.g., public 
safety information.
	` Be a source of accurate and consistent information. 
	` Respond quickly and positively to questions and concerns.
	` Provide updates.
	` Provide reassurance – particularly when emotions are running high and false accusations and 
rumours are rife. 
	` Cultivate communication and mutual understanding between the police and the public.
Equally, the media should not interfere with LEAs in the lawful exercise of their duty or otherwise 
hinder or obstruct. This can happen when photographers and television crews in particular position 
themselves where it allows them to get the best pictures. By working with the media in advance – 
or even on the day – LEAs can demonstrate respect for the job that the media have to do and show 
willingness to help them carry out their work, while putting down a firm marker that this cannot be to the 
detriment of public or police safety. Once the demonstration or protest is underway, it may be useful to 
establish a media perimeter from which journalists can cover the protests while staying safe (see Box 
on Media Perimeter).172 
A media strategy and establishing a press office will help LEAs to achieve all this. It is also important to 
choose officers who can act as spokespeople on the ground and have a special remit to develop and 
build positive working relationships with key media outlets. They will need to be media trained so they 
understand and are confident in answering the kind of questions likely to be asked by journalists in any 
given situation. They should also be aware of any legal restrictions as to what can and cannot be said 
so as not to hamper ongoing investigations or prejudice any possible future legal proceedings.173 
Of note, for large scale pre-planned events LEAs may organise command structures as described 
in Module 4, along the lines of strategic, tactical and operational nodes, which should have media 
communications within those structures.
Half the job of controlling security is providing reliable 
information to the community and that means working with 
the media.” 
Participant at police-media forum in Monrovia, Liberia, February 2018174 
172  UNESCO. 2015. Freedom of Expression and Public Order Training Manual. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000231305
173   Boyle, Michael, and Jean-Claude Vullierme. 2020. A brief introduction to policing public gatherings: A guide for practitioners  
https:/ /rm.coe.int/a-brief-introduction-to-policing-public-assemblies/1680a1aaf3
174   Betz, Michelle. 2018. Strengthening police and media relations for the safety of journalists and peaceful, free and fair elections in West Africa  
https:/ /www.mediasupport.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/2758-Police_media_relations.final_web.pdf
140 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsMedia Perimeter 
Media presence during police operations, especially during demonstrations or 
at crime scenes, can be secured by establishing a media perimeter. Such a clear 
boundary, or delimited space, must have the following features: 
	`Provides a good view of the event, and is easily accessible so that media can 
satisfactorily cover the proceedings. This also encourages media to remain 
within the perimeter. 
	`Provides a safe and secure location for the media, while also preserving 
evidence (e.g., at crimes scenes). 
	`Provides a central location for the dissemination of information to the media. A 
press officer or police spokesperson should be present to provide relevant 
information and answer questions from the media. 
It must be noted that the media cannot be confined to cover an event from the 
established media perimeter. Rather, the perimeter offers secure access to 
facilitate the work of journalists, and also allows LEAs to carry out their duties 
effectively.175 
Protesters locking or gluing themselves to objects such as railings, street furniture, roads and 
pavements creates an obstruction that cannot be removed without specialist equipment. In addition 
to being disruptive, such action naturally attracts media interest – as does how LEAs deal with them. 
Specialist protester removal teams not only have to release the protesters safely and respectfully, but 
also are more than likely to feature in any media coverage and have to deal with journalists on site.176 
Discussion points
	` What aspects of your LEA role do you think journalists fail to understand?
	` What aspects of a journalist’s role would you like to understand better?
5.2.2 Security and safety of journalists
In 2020, UNESCO highlighted a dramatic rise in LEA violations of media freedom when dealing with 
protests. In its report Safety of Journalists Covering Protests – Preserving Freedom of the Press 
During Times of Civil Unrest, UNESCO called for more training for both LEA officers and journalists in 
how to behave during protests to ensure the safety of the media to support freedom of expression.177  
Further, the report also highlights the increase in police use of non-lethal ammunition ranging from 
rubber bullets to pepper balls, which has injured dozens of journalists. 
175   UNESCO. 2015. Freedom of Expression and Public Order Training Manual. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000231305  pp. 128-129
176   Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services. 2021. Getting the balance right? An inspection of how effectively the police deal with 
protests. https:/ /www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/wp-content/uploads/getting-the-balance-right-an-inspection-of-how-effectively-the-police-deal-
with-protests.pdf , pp. 46-48
177  UNESCO. 2020. Safety of Journalists Covering Protests https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206
| 141
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5In 2021, France’s highest court, the Conseil d’Etat, ruled that journalists do not have to leave the area 
when a crowd is ordered to disperse by LEAs. They should just position themselves away from the 
demonstrators in such a way that they cannot be confused with them or obstruct LEAs. Journalists 
must be allowed to continue to observe and obtain information without restriction.178 
Putting a hand in front of a lens, seizing and damaging their tools of trade such as cameras or recording 
equipment or tampering with them and erasing recordings is unlawful. If LEA officials break or smash 
equipment deliberately, this should be considered a criminal offence and those responsible should be 
held accountable.179 
Security forces have detained dozens of journalists covering protests in Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, 
North America, Europe, Latin America, North Africa and the Middle East. Some of these arrests were 
temporary and either no charges were filed, or they were dropped by authorities. In some cases, 
journalists were arrested individually; in other cases, a number of journalists were arrested while 
covering protests.180 
In North America, Europe and the Middle East, journalists have been criminally charged for covering 
anti-government protests against police brutality and government economic policies declared illegal 
or unauthorized by authorities.
Further, it is increasingly difficult to separate bona fide journalists who abide by a clear code of ethics as 
to how to behave and what they can and cannot publish, from people who turn up at protests claiming 
to be members of the press.
These people call themselves journalists, start yelling they are 
press and then film the reaction of LEA officers. They then 
publish their material online without any context or 
knowledge of press law. Security and law enforcement see 
them and think we are all bad.” 181 
One solution is for accredited members of the press to be easily identifiable by the word “ PRESS ” 
on their clothing and equipment.182  The benefits of this should be stressed to the media as part of the 
LEA’s communication strategy underlining how it will enable you to better support them in their work. 
However, this can make them targets for some protesters so being able to show proper accreditation 
such as an official local or International Press Card183  should be sufficient to enable them to continue 
their work safely and unhindered. More importantly, they should be operating in a non-participatory 
manner and demonstrably separating themselves from protesters.
178   Conseil D’Etat. 2021. French Ordinance No 444849 . (2021, June 10 )  
https:/ /www.conseil-etat.fr/fr/arianeweb/CRP/conclusion/2021-06-10/444849?download_pdf
179  OSCE. 2020. Handling of the Media during Public Assemblies. https://www.osce.org/files/f/documents/2/f/467892.pdf
180  UNESCO. 2020. Safety of Journalists Covering Protests https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206
181   Jason Parkinson (video journalist) quoted in Averkiou, Anna. 2021. Security and News media collaborate to raise awareness  
https:/ /citysecuritymagazine.com/security-management/security-and-news-media-collaborate-to-raise-awareness/
182  Boyle, Michael, and Jean-Claude Vullierme. 2021. A brief introduction to policing public gatherings: A guide for practitioners  
https:/ /rm.coe.int/a-brief-introduction-to-policing-public-assemblies/1680a1aaf3
183  See IFJ. International Press Card (IPC) https://www.ifj.org/press-card.html
142 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsLEA officers should remember that: 
	` Even if someone cannot identify themselves as a journalist, they are still a citizen and entitled to the 
usual freedoms and human rights. They must be free to act as witnesses on behalf of the general 
public. 
	` Scrutiny is everywhere in the digital age especially when there are hundreds, if not thousands of 
smart phones in one place. 
	` It is important that LEA officers are trained to understand how their actions might be perceived 
and presented and the reputational impact on their organisation if they do not deal with them in a 
lawful manner. 
	` Any “heavy-handedness” or unlawful obstruction by LEAs whilst trying to prevent crime, 
breaches of the peace and serious disruption will most likely attract negative media coverage 
from journalists and others. 
	` LEAs should be provided with instructions on the proper use of non-lethal weapons including 
firing down at the ground so that rubberised and other projectiles do not hit journalists and others 
by direct fire, especially at close range.184 
Case Study – Brazil
Freedom House reports that Brazil has strong constitutional guarantees of freedom of 
expression, but they are not always enforced, and journalists face a real risk of violent attack. 
In 2016, the Brazilian Association of Investigative Journalism (ABRAJI) recorded 73 instances 
of aggression against journalists covering political protests. It said more than half of the attacks 
were perpetrated by police officers.185  
In 2017 , after hearing testimonies, the Sao Paulo Attorney General sent the Military Police 
command a number of recommendations for guidelines in order for the LEA to preserve the 
work of and protect journalists. They included administrative accountability in cases involving 
assaults or violent acts against media professionals and communicators in general and 
ongoing training for officers to ensure they understood their role in allowing and protecting 
journalists during protests.186 
Discussion points
	`  Have you ever had to deal with the media during a protest? What happened? Was it a positive 
or negative experience? In the light of the above, what could you do differently/better?
	` Does your LEA have a media strategy or way of dealing directly with the media during 
protests?
	`  What methods, if any, do the media use to identify themselves during protests?
184  UNESCO. 2020. Safety of Journalists Covering Protests. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206
185  See Freedom House. Freedom of the Press 2017 – Brazil. https:/ /freedomhouse.org/country/brazil/freedom-world/2017
186  UNESCO. 2020. Safety of Journalists Covering Protests. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4206
| 143
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 55.2.3 Notification
Permission or authority to hold a public gathering is not needed as the right to assemble already exists. 
However, in many jurisdictions, organisers of public gatherings are required to give prior notification. 
This usually includes basic information such as:
	` Contact details
	` The purpose of the assembly
	` Date, time and place 
	` How many participants are expected
	` Whether it will be confined to one place or involve a march or procession
	` Direction and route
	` Whether there will be bands and vehicles
This information assists LEAs in facilitating events, protecting the rights of others, minimising disruption 
and allowing others to make arrangements where the event may interfere with the exercise of their 
rights, such as freedom of movement. LEAs should not use the notification process as an opportunity 
to restrict the freedom to assemble or seek to impose a process that is overly bureaucratic or presents 
obstacles to those seeking to exercise their rights. 
There will be times when gatherings are spontaneous and lack the coordination and management 
provided by formal organisers, with social media and smartphones used to bring people together. 
Clearly, under these circumstances, no formal notification will have been given for these gatherings, 
but they will still need to be facilitated by the police. Participants still enjoy the full rights afforded under 
the right to assembly as provided by the Convention and should not be subject to dispersal on those 
grounds alone. Moreover, it should be assumed from the start that an assembly is peaceful until there 
is evidence to the contrary.187 
5.2.4 Engagement with stakeholders
LEAs should be seen to be as open as possible in the policing of events and engaging with organisers 
and the local community to facilitate their right of assembly and ensure public safety for both the 
protesters and those who might be affected by any disruption. 
This may not always be possible as, depending upon the nature of the assembly and past relationships 
with the LEA, organisers may be reluctant to enter any form of discussion. LEAs should let them know of 
the positive benefits of engaging so that they can be aware that LEAs are working impartially to deliver 
a professional police service that aims to enable their assembly. It also allows LEAs an opportunity to 
manage their expectations and to let them know how they intend to police the event. 
187   Boyle, Michael, and Jean-Claude Vullierme. 2021. A brief introduction to policing public gatherings: A guide for practitioners  
https:/ /rm.coe.int/a-brief-introduction-to-policing-public-assemblies/1680a1aaf3
144 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsWhere there is no formal organiser of an event, social media and smartphones are often used to bring 
people together without any formal prior notice being given to the local LEA. This is not grounds for 
viewing the assembly as illegitimate and beginning to assess it negatively. LEAs should keep an open 
mind, informed by intelligence.188  
During the course of the assembly, if difficulties arise, LEAs must have a means of communicating and 
negotiating with the organisers. This role can sometimes be performed by community LEA officers 
who enjoy trust and credibility from those involved. 
It is good practice to share as much as possible without compromising your operation. A media briefing 
in advance of an event can be a useful way of explaining the methods that will be used to control the 
crowds and what will and will not be tolerated from protesters. This will serve to assist journalists 
covering the event and demonstrate that LEAs are not hostile to it by wanting to facilitate and police it 
with minimum disruption while ensuring the safety and freedoms of all.189 
Discussion points
	` What are the issues you face when planning your operations around peaceful protests? 
	` How much engagement does your LEA have with organisers of peaceful protests?
	` Does your LEA have trained specialist community officers? How do they engage with the 
local community? 
	` How can the media help when preparing for a protest event?
5.2.5 Monitoring of and reporting on protests
According to the General comment No. 37 (2020) of the UN Human Rights Committee:
The role of journalists, human rights defenders, election 
monitors and others involved in monitoring or reporting on 
assemblies is of particular importance for the full enjoyment 
of the right of peaceful assembly.” 190  
All are entitled to protection and may not be prohibited from or unduly limited in exercising these 
functions, including with respect to monitoring the actions of LEAs. They must not face reprisals or 
other harassment, and their equipment must not be confiscated or damaged.
188   Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services. 2021. Getting the balance right? An inspection of how effectively the police deal with 
protests. https:/ /www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/wp-content/uploads/getting-the-balance-right-an-inspection-of-how-effectively-the-police-deal-
with-protests.pdf
189   Boyle, Michael, and Jean-Claude Vullierme. 2021. A brief introduction to policing public gatherings: A guide for practitioners  
https:/ /rm.coe.int/a-brief-introduction-to-policing-public-assemblies/1680a1aaf3
190  UN. 2020. General comment no. 37 (2020) on the right of peaceful assembly (article 21): Human Rights Committee. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/3884725
| 145
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5Even if an assembly is declared unlawful or is dispersed, that does not terminate 
the right to monitor. It is a good practice for independent national human rights 
institutions and non-governmental organisations to monitor assemblies. 
Ultimately the use of force for legitimate reasons (see Module 4 – 4.4.6 Use of 
force) does not mean that journalists should be hindered from reporting and 
monitoring dispersal operations.
LEAs sometimes seek to use footage or pictures taken by journalists to secure convictions. This falls 
under the right to protect one’s confidential sources of information and should always be respected by 
LEAs to avoid putting journalists at risk from protesters wanting to avoid being identified.191 
Monitoring of and reporting on protests – Principle 19: 192  
19.1   States should allow and actively facilitate reporting on, and the independent 
monitoring of, protests by all media and independent observers, without 
imposing undue limitations on their activities and without official hindrance, 
as far as is possible, and without geographical restrictions.
19.2   States should ensure that no individuals documenting police actions and 
human rights violations during protests are specifically targeted because of 
covering and reporting on protests. Wilful attempts to confiscate, damage 
or break related equipment, and destroy/erase printed material, footage, 
audio, visual and other recordings should be a criminal offence and those 
responsible should be held accountable. 
19.3  The photographing or video recording of the policing of protests and 
related activities by the media, observers, protesters and other third parties 
should not be prevented, and any requirement to surrender film or digitally 
recorded images or footage to law enforcement agencies should be 
subject to prior judicial scrutiny. 
19.4  States should establish programmes to allow designated and trained 
independent observers to gain access to protests for the purposes of 
observing, documenting and reporting on the protests. They should also 
be permitted to remain in the vicinity of protests following the issuing of 
dispersal orders and be granted access to detention facilities, unless there 
are exigent circumstances.
191   UNESCO. 2015. Freedom of Expression and Public Order Training Manual. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000231305
192   Article19.org. 2016. The Right to Protest: Principles on the protection of human rights in protests  
https:/ /www.article19.org/data/files/medialibrary/38581/Right_to_protest_principles_final.pdf , pp.44-45
146 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents19.5   In order to ensure the independent coverage and monitoring of protests by 
the media and independent observers, states should, at the very least: 
  a)  Refrain from imposing accreditation requirements on the media in 
order for them to be allowed to cover protests; 
  b  Guarantee as extensively as possible the safety of journalists, media 
workers and observers, including using special protection measures. 
The need to guarantee safety, however, should not be used as a pretext 
to unnecessarily limit their rights, in particular their rights to freedom of 
expression, freedom of movement and access to information; 
  c)  Fully respect the right of the protection of sources in relation to protests; 
any restrictions should be subject to the narrow limitations set out 
under international law; 
  d)  Ensure that journalists and independent observers are not arrested 
and detained by law enforcement officers as a result of their lack of 
credentials; nor should they be arrested as a result of their failure to 
leave an area once a dispersal order is given unless their presence 
would unduly interfere with police action; 
  e)  Make the role, function, responsibilities and rights of the media 
and observers an integral part of the training curriculum for law-
enforcement officers whose duties include the policing of protests.
 
| 147
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 55.3 Elections
Media freedom and professional reporting are both essential 
requirements for a free and fair election. When the media 
plays its role as a balanced information source for the public 
and a tool for accountability, elections are more likely to  
be fair.” 
 Thomson Reuters Foundation193  
Elections and referendums on a national and local level are key events in a democracy. LEAs play a 
crucial role in maintaining public order and protecting everyone involved in order for them to feel safe 
and able to participate in rallies, debates and other assemblies to express their opinions and vote 
without fear of attack. This will ensure that the entire electoral process itself is in accordance with 
democratic standards.194 
It is therefore vital for LEAs to remain neutral and demonstrate this neutrality through their 
communication, behaviour and arrangements they put in place through the various stages before, 
during and after an election.195 
The media also plays a crucial part in maintaining the integrity of an election. Political parties and 
candidates, interest groups and other key stakeholders such as the electoral commission, election 
observers, civil society organisations and the public rely on the media for credible, fact-based 
information and eye-witness accounts about the candidates, the electoral process and security 
issues. Journalists also disseminate and clarify information on emerging issues and express any 
concerns to the public. 
As a result, journalists often find themselves in the midst of competing interests and information 
throughout the electioneering period and can become targets of threats and physical attacks by 
political activists and thugs simply for doing their work.196 
193   Thomson Reuters Foundation. Elections Reporting. https:/ /www.trust.org/media-development/programmes/?sfid=a15D0000018xQe5IAE&areaOfFo -
cus=Governance%20and%20Hum  (accessed August 2022)
194   Boyle, Michael, and Jean-Claude Vullierme. 2021. A brief introduction to policing public gatherings: A guide for practitioners  
https:/ /rm.coe.int/a-brief-introduction-to-policing-public-assemblies/1680a1aaf3
195  UNESCO. 2022. Elections in digital times: a guide for electoral practitioners. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000382102
196  UNESCO. 2019. Elections and Media in Digital Times. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371486 , p.33
148 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsCredible and inclusive elections  are based on a number of basic democratic 
principles. These are affirmed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Key among these are the 
rights to freedom of speech, access to information and equality before the law. 
These principles mean that the electorate and political actors have the right to 
freely discuss political issues and public policies and to express opinions. Voters 
and candidates rely heavily on access to the media to both impart and receive 
information. This requires an open and diverse media that can provide balanced 
and impartial coverage and equitable access for competing candidates and 
parties.197 
5.3. 1 The Electoral Cycle
The Electoral Cycle is a visual planning and training tool developed by the European Commission, the 
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (International IDEA) and the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to support all parties involved in every stage of the electoral 
processes and understand the cyclical nature of the various challenges they face.
institutional 
strengthening
& professional 
development
networking
candidates
print and distribution  
of ballot papers codes of 
conduct
media access
campaign 
coordination
complaints 
and appealsspecial & 
external votingcounting
dispute 
resolutionresults 
tabulationStrategyPlanning
T raining
Information
Registration
Nomination
ResultsCampaign
Voting
Official ResultsReform
ReviewEMB reform
audits &  
evaluationsarchiving & 
 researchlegal reform 
proposalselectoral 
system & 
boundariesvoter register  
updatestaff recruitment
procurement
operational training 
for electoral officialslogistics & security
voter  
registrationparty registrationparty financingobserver  
accreditationvoter & civic 
educationstakeholder  
liaisondevelop  
proceduresbudget &  
funding
electoral calendar 
& operational 
work-plans
Post Electoral Period 
Pre-Electoral Period 
Pre-Electoral Period 
Figure 5.1 The electoral cycle and media198 
197  UNDP . 2014. Media & Elections. https:/ /www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publications/2038C-UNDP-Media_and_Elections_LR.pdf
198  UNESCO. 2022. Elections in digital times: a guide for electoral practitioners. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000382102 , p.22
| 149
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5The Electoral Cycle:
	` is divided into three main periods: the pre-electoral period, the electoral period and the post-
electoral period.
	` has no fixed starting or ending points, which is also true for the three periods and for the segments 
within the cycle. Some post-electoral period activities may still be ongoing when activities related 
to the next electoral cycle start. Some segments, such as civic education and support to political 
parties, cut across the whole cycle throughout all three periods.
	` is valuable in engaging other stakeholders in the process and providing them with tools to improve 
their assessment of times and roles for their action.199 
When it comes to communication and media engagement during the various stages of the Electoral 
Cycle, LEAs should keep the following in mind to enable a free and fair election process:
	` Understand the different stages of the Election Cycle and which ones are likely to be more 
critically sensitive such as voter registration, candidate selection, campaigns and the result itself 
and may need increased LEA presence and planning. 
	` Maintain a discreet presence. Citizens must feel safe in order to vote freely and express 
themselves freely during election debates. Being seen talking about security problems to the 
media during an election campaign could dissuade some voters from exercising their right to vote. 
	` Maintain a low media profile during the election campaign to allow politics to dominate the news 
agenda.
	` Remain transparent, but discreet. Do not hold news conferences near polling stations. If an 
incident does happen, it is best to hold perpetrators in a neutral location, such as in front of a police 
station.
	` Do not be seen with elected officials during the election campaign as some may wish to be seen 
with LEA officers to increase their credibility. 
	` Do not publish an assessment or annual report during the election period to avoid the figures 
being used for or against the ruling party by demonstrating their success or failure in terms of 
public safety. 
	` Ban and reprimand any political declarations, stances or activities by LEA employees whilst on 
duty – including comments and sharing content on social media.
	` Be respectful and polite in your interaction with the media at all times to maintain a professional 
working relationship and avoid bringing your LEA into disrepute.
	` If an LEA union takes part in discussions about issues relating to working conditions, crime, LEA 
funding etc, it should be done on a civilian basis, without showing any visual insignia such as flags, 
uniform, etc. 
	` Ensure free access to voting stations, including journalists so they can cover the elections. 
	` If journalists are present, make sure they are not intimidating to voters, i.e., they should not be 
situated near voting booths.
	` Ensure journalists are briefed before, during and after elections so they are aware of what security 
measures and logistical arrangements are in place and behaviour requirements required at fixed 
locations such as polling stations and the count. 
199  UNESCO. 2022. Elections in digital times: a guide for electoral practitioners. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000382102 , pp.21-22
150 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents	` Be aware that the needs, interests and perceptions of foreign journalists may differ from those of 
local media. 
	` Help journalists to understand the role of LEAs.
	` Schedule debriefs at every stage of the Electoral Cycle and share learning that would benefit 
future planning.
LEAs should stay focussed on their mission and avoid different political interests by maintaining a 
neutral approach throughout. Politicians and governing parties change, but the LEAs remain. The 
public need to have confidence in the LEA and their independence.200 
Discussion points
	` Using the Electoral Cycle, identify the critical points that might need increased security in  
your region. 
	` Discuss practical ways in which you can enhance security planning for the media during each 
period of the election process. 
5.3.2   Collaborating with Electoral Management Bodies (EMBs) 
EMBs take the lead in this process and must operate impartially and independently so that they are 
insulated from political pressure. They are responsible for managing and overseeing all the essential 
elements of an election including: 
	` determining who is able to vote
	` voter registration
	` validating political parties and candidates
	` producing ballots
	` monitoring campaign financing
	` managing polling stations
	` managing vote counts 
	` announcing election results 
	` managing polling and Election Day
	` counting the votes
	` tabulating and announcing the election results
	` resolving electoral disputes.
200   UNESCO. 2015. Freedom of Expression and Public Order Training Manual. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000231305
| 151
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5It is vital for LEAs and other election stakeholders to collaborate with EMBs throughout the Election 
Cycle to coordinate security planning, implementation, monitoring and responses. Working together 
will also help to mitigate conflict and go some way to supporting the democratic process of an election.
EMBs also have a key role to play with regard to the media both in terms of safeguarding the role of an 
independent press as part of that electoral process and using it effectively to communicate with the 
public to disseminate its own messages. 
However, legitimate processes by journalists to obtain and disseminate accurate information to the 
public may sometimes run counter to or conflict with operations by LEAs, resulting in misunderstandings 
and mistrust. 
One way to address such issues is to create a space for dialogue early in the Election Cycle to enable 
the different stakeholders to discuss their concerns. This serves to create greater understanding of 
each other’s roles and concerns and to work towards better working relationships and consensus of 
best practice.201 
Issuing a joint statement from all the EMBs and Electoral Practitioners (EPs), endorsed by all the 
candidates and political parties, the returning officer (the independent official who is responsible for 
overseeing elections in one or more constituencies) and LEA sends a clear and strong signal of a 
cohesive joint approach. This should be voluntary, and no stigma should be attached to anyone not 
wishing to be included.
UNESCO’s 2022 handbook on Elections in digital times: a guide for electoral 
practitioners, provides recommendations on how to address the challenges 
of a holding elections in the digital era. While these are neither prescriptive 
nor exhaustive, and need to be adapted to the regional context, the following 
recommendations are based upon existing good practices and available guidance. 
1)  Contribute to upholding a peaceful environment for the conduct of elections 
in line with international human rights standards, acting impartially, without 
favouring any specific candidate or political party.
2)  Protect the rights of freedom of expression, participation, association, and 
assembly during elections, including by ensuring journalists’ safety as well as by 
avoiding arbitrary actions in relation to legislation that criminalizes disinformation. 
T oward this goal, human rights training should be provided to security forces 
members, and internal media and social media guidelines should be developed 
to avoid situations of public misperception, such as opinions being published by 
individual members that could be taken as official statements.202 
201   See College of Policing. Policing elections: Key Roles and planning  
https:/ /www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/policing-elections/key-roles-and-planning/#media
202  UNESCO. 2022. Elections in digital times: a guide for electoral practitioners. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000382102 , p.130
152 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents5.3.3 Conflict during elections
When trouble kicks off, the press show up. However, so often 
we find the LEAs are not trained enough and don’t know 
what the law allows. They are thinking they are doing the 
right thing – but they are not.” 203 
Jason Parker, Video Journalist 
Elections are political events with high-stakes outcomes that take place in many different contexts. 
Some of these are marred by non-level playing fields, political and social instability, violence and/or 
intimidation. Some parts of the electoral cycle, such as the campaign period and post-polling when 
the votes are being counted, are particularly vulnerable. 
Journalists naturally gravitate to these hotspots but can also play a role in preventing conflict by 
broadcasting and publishing accurate information about developments. 
Understanding this and providing journalists with up-to-date information and explaining the 
processes relating to voting procedures or checks at polling stations will go some way to ensure 
that what is being reported is accurate. At the same time, LEAs still have a duty to keep them from 
harm, as much as any other citizen. 
As violent conflicts become a regular feature of elections around the world, journalists are being 
deliberately targeted, often where some key players in the election do not like their reporting. A 
joint initiative by Media for West Africa (MWFA), International Media Support (IMS) and ECOWAS, 
Strengthening police and media relations for the safety of journalists and peaceful, free and fair 
elections in West Africa204  suggested that this need to institute confidence-building mechanisms 
and professional journalistic processes to facilitate dialogue between the two groups is essential 
to engender greater understanding and eliminate distrust and mutual suspicion. This promotes 
and creates a culture of peaceful elections and democratic processes in the region, where key 
stakeholders, like the media and security agencies, recognise each other’s roles and enable the 
conditions for the optimal performance of those roles.
203   Averkiou, Anna. 2021. Security and News media collaborate to raise awareness  
https:/ /citysecuritymagazine.com/security-management/security-and-news-media-collaborate-to-raise-awareness/
204  Betz, Michelle. 2018. Strengthening police and media relations for the safety of journalists and peaceful, free and fair elections in West Africa  
https:/ /www.mediasupport.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/2758-Police_media_relations.final_web.pdf
| 153
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 55.4 Activities 
The following activities enable trainers to: 
	` Det ermine whether participants’ understanding of the State’s duties in facilitating coverage of 
political events and elections has increased since the start of the module.
	` Assess whether participants can now make sound judgements regarding the rights of journalists 
in providing effective coverage and monitoring of the democratic process. 
	` Assess participants’ understanding of their responsibilities, and limits of, during protests and 
public e vents.
5.4. 1 Activity – The Rights of Journalists in a Protest
T rainer to ask participants to call out descriptions of the media. T rainer then shows 
National Union of Journalists Public Order Press and Police video about the rights of 
reporters and photographers during demonstrations and riots. 
Video: https:/ /youtu.be/HaACXnfe T zY  
Split participants into small groups to discuss the video and any issues arising about 
how they deal with journalists during protests – especially when they themselves are in 
challenging situations. One group member to present back with the results of their 
group. Once group presentations are completed, the trainer should chair a debate 
between participants on their conclusions.
1. What is their reaction to the video? Any surprises? 
2. What did they learn about the role of journalists in public spaces? 
3. Do they have any examples of dealing with journalists during demonstrations? 
4. What might they do differently next time to respect the rights of journalists? 
5. How can they enga ge with and support the media in their regions?
154 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents5.4.2 Activity – Protecting Journalists during a Protest
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions, with 
one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group presentations 
are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants on their 
conclusions.
T rainer to explain the context of and play the ResistanceGB video. 
https:/ /youtu.be/ _wNy4k7OdvY  
In June 2021, crowds had gathered near Parliament in central London to protest 
against the Government’s extension of coronavirus restrictions in England by four 
weeks. Footage was shared on an anti-vaxxer media platform Resistance GB of a 
BBC journalist, Nicolas Watt, being harassed and chased by anti-vaxxer demonstrators.
1. Watch the video. Note down and discuss: 
 a. The actions of LEA officers
 b.  What did they observe about the BBC journalist? (T rainers notes: identification lanyard, no 
provocation, tried to walk away peacefully towards police, scared, headed for safety, other 
bona fide photographers were getting pushed out of the way)
 c. If they were on duty, what would/could they have done in this situation?
2.  Participants to imagine they are planning security for a big public protest. What considerations 
should they consider with respect to journalists who will be covering the event alongside ensuring 
public safety?
| 155
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 5156 |
Module 5  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsT able of Contents
Key points | 159
6.1 Introduction | 160
6.2 Crimes against journalists  | 161
6.2.1 The duty to Prevent, Protect and Prosecute | 162
6.3 Protecting others | 164
6.3.1 Protecting sources and whistleblowers | 164
6.3.2 Protecting victims, next-of-kin and witnesses | 166
6.4 Investigating crimes against journalists | 167
6.4.1 Examples of Investigation Initiatives | 171
6.5 Intelligence and evidence within the Law | 173
6.5.1 Access to crime scenes  | 175
6.6 Preventing prejudice of proceedings | 176
6.7 Activities | 177
6.7 .1 Activity – Protecting journalists | 177
6.7 .2 Activity – Investigating crimes against journalists | 177Module 6
Enabling the judicial process, 
investigations and their scrutiny
| 157
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 6Module aims
 `T o understand why the role that journalists 
play in society often puts them at risk of 
attacks and threats.
 `T o consider the ways in which LEA can 
uphold the rule of law in relation to 
managing crimes against journalists.
 `T o understand ‘good practice’ in relation to 
investigating crimes against journalists.
 `T o understand the importance of 
protecting journalists’ sources and 
consider how LEAs can support that.
158 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsKey points
	`Nine out of ten cases of killings of journalists around the world remain judicially 
unresolved. T o this, one needs to add the countless other violations of the criminal 
law endured by journalists, which include kidnappings, enforced disappearance, 
arbitrary detention, torture, intimidation and harassment, both offline and online, 
and seizure or destruction of material. 
	`The ‘three Ps’ structure – Prevent, Protect, Prosecute – is very helpful in supporting 
the rule of law in relation to crimes against journalists. The effective prosecution of 
crimes against journalists acts as a warning against future criminal acts; effective 
preventative measures reduce the need for protection from crimes; and effective 
protection helps to prevent criminal acts. 
	`The protection of journalistic sources is central to the ability of journalists to 
properly investigate stories, as well as for the protection of individuals and 
whistleblowers who provide information to them. 
	`Because of the particular nature of their work, when threats are made, or crimes 
committed against journalists, it is important that at early stage, the investigation 
looks at a contextual analysis of the possible relationship between the alleged 
crime and the activities and work (past and present) of the victim and uses that 
analysis to frame the overall investigative strategy. 
	`Effective intelligence gathering, management and the operational response to 
intelligence are key aspects of any criminal investigation. Intelligence gathered 
from sensitive sources, such as personal surveillance and data interception tend 
to be regulated at a higher level of legislation to minimise the risk of unnecessary 
intrusion into the private lives of citizens.
	`Investigations into crimes against journalists must also conclude with timely, 
successful prosecutions and appropriate punishment for those responsible in 
order to end impunity for such offences.
| 159
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 66. 1 Introduction
Each time a journalist is killed, a pillar of democracy 
crumbles.”
Harlem Desir, former OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media205 
This module focuses on journalists as potential victims of crime and the contribution that LEA 
investigators can make, in bringing the perpetrators of crimes against journalists to justice, and why 
doing so is important to upholding human rights, good governance and democracy. 
The main focus of this module is on journalists being victims of violent crime or potential victims, 
including homicide, but also the need to consider what might be thought of as other attacks against 
journalists including confiscation of/damage to equipment, threats and intimidation, and other forms 
of harassment.
The journalist’s role often places them at odds, or in dispute, with powerful people, particularly when 
investigating allegations of corruption involving public figures. This aspect of their work can be a 
particular driver of criminality directed against them. 
Against this backdrop, it is widely recognised that a free and effective media whose members can do 
their job is a key element to protect key human rights freedoms:
In a climate where journalists are safe, citizens find it easier to 
access quality information and many other objectives become 
achievable as a result: democratic governance and poverty 
reduction; conservation of the environment; gender equality 
and the empowerment of women; justice and a culture of 
human rights, to name a few.” 206 
Because the victimisation of journalists is potentially related to their role, and because their role is of 
importance to wider society, investigators of crimes against journalists must ensure that all necessary 
investigative steps are taken so that the judicial process is successful in obtaining justice as a deterrent 
to others.
Discussion points
	` Why are journalists important to society?
	` Why might their role bring them into conflict with others?
205   OSCE. 2018. Each time a journalist is killed, a pillar of democracy crumbles, says OSCE Representative on first anniversary of Daphne Caruana Galizia’s murder 
https:/ /www.osce.org/representative-on-freedom-of-media/3997 46
206  OHCHR. 2012. UN plan of Action on Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity  
https:/ /www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Journalists/UN_plan_on_Safety_Journalists_EN.pdf
160 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents6.2 Crimes against journalists 
Free and independent journalism is our greatest ally in 
combating misinformation and disinformation.”
António Guterres, UN Secretary-General207 
From 2016 to the end of 2020, 400 journalists were killed for their work or whilst doing their job. 
Though this is a slight decrease compared to the previous five-year period, during which 491 
journalists were killed, recent years have shown the importance of considering threats against 
journalists in a holistic sense.208 
In nine out of ten cases around the world, the killers of journalists go unpunished. T o this, one needs 
to add the countless other violations of the criminal law endured by journalists, which include 
kidnappings, enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture, intimidation and harassment, both 
offline and online, and seizure or destruction of material. Threats and hate speech against journalists 
are increasing online, as well as harmful disinformation. Female journalists are significantly at risk, 
being targeted both as journalists and as women.
Perpetrators of these attacks are not only non-state actors such as criminals or extremist groups. 
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, 25% of murder suspects in cases with journalist 
victims are government or military officials.209 
Such attacks violate the human rights of the victims and, more significantly, undermine freedom of 
expression and the rule of law. Under international law, States are obligated to investigate attacks 
on journalists effectively, promptly, thoroughly, independently and impartially, and prosecute those 
responsible. 
LEAs thus play a vital role in protecting and supporting an environment conducive to these fundamental 
freedoms. Without a minimum level of public order, citizens and journalists cannot do their work safely 
and fully enjoy their right to free expression, and free speech becomes restricted for all.
“The most direct limitation is through censorship, which in journalism may be of two types: 
1.  censorship or suppression of public information that are directly enforced by state authorities or by 
private parties who have the power to do so; or 
2.  self-censorship by journalists themselves and others who self-publish or otherwise perform a 
journalistic function. Self-censorship in journalism occurs when a journalist suppresses information 
of public interest in the absence of formal hindrances being often motivated by a wish to avoid 
penalties or reprisals. This most often occurs within a context or general climate of intimidation.”  210 
207   UN Secretary-General statement in his video message on World Press Freedom Day 2021: ‘ Journalism As A Public Good: 30 Years Of The Windhoek Declaration,’ 
https:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=NW3NqY 4hr_0
208   UNESCO. 2020. Protect Journalists, Protect the Truth – UNESCO Director-General’s Report on the Safety of Journalists and the Danger of Impunity.  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf000037 4738
209   International Bar Association. 2020. Advice on Promoting More Effective Investigations into Abuses Against Journalists  
https:/ /www.ibanet.org/MediaHandler?id=5A00CE8E-0D66-41E2-A04A-FFCC36F8C67D
210   CoE. 2020. A Mission to Inform: Journalists at risk speak out  
https:/ /rm.coe.int/prems-021220-gbr-2018-a-mission-to-inform-journalists-at-risk-speak-ou/16809ff1e2
| 161
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 6LEAs therefore have an important role in protecting journalists against attacks by others who seek 
to prevent them from doing their work. LEAs, along with the judiciary and prosecutors, play an 
essential part in reinforcing the ‘three Ps’ (prevention, protection and prosecution) when dealing 
with journalists.211 
This three-cornered approach to working with journalists on the part of investigators and LEAs, 
demonstrates an important context that should dominate thinking when considering journalists 
as potential victims of crime. In this context, the challenge is not simply around ensuring effective 
investigation of crimes against journalists but also extends to early consideration of preventative 
interventions and helping with protective measures in advance of victimisation occurring. For example, 
in a potential public order situation, attacks against journalists could be prevented by early engagement 
with the media, effective communication and planning, and establishing media perimeters from which 
media members can do their work. 
Protective interventions, such as evacuation and providing protective cover in the same scenario 
could be considered where risk begins to manifest. 
The 3Ps
Using the ‘three Ps’ as a structure for considering engagement with journalists 
about risk is effective because each element supports the others: effective 
prosecution of offences against journalists act as a preventative measure for future 
criminality; effective prevention minimises the need for protection and effective 
protection and so on.
LEAs must also ensure that journalists can access information about crimes 
and other matters of public interest, and they must ensure that their own 
communications with the media are transparent, honest and timely.
6.2. 1 The duty to Prevent, Protect and Prosecute
The requirement for the State to take measures to ensure safety of and protect journalists is covered 
in Module 2. However, wider requirements are needed to fundamentally and comprehensively ensure 
the media can operate freely and effectively in democratic societies. Following the adoption of the 
2016 UN Resolution, civil society organization ARTICLE 19 published a report titled Acting on UN 
Human Rights Council Resolution 33/2 on the Safety of Journalists: Prevent – Protect – Prosecute.212 
The report lists specific actions that must be taken to realise the duty to prevent, protect and prosecute, 
as enshrined in the text of the resolution.
Under the duty to prevent, States are required to:
1. Create and maintain an enabling environment for journalists.
2. Ensure national laws do not interfere with journalists’ independence.
3. Release arbitrarily arrested or detailed journalists.
4. Refrain from spying on journalists or intercepting their communications.
211  See UNESCO’s explainer video on How to Stop Impunity for Crimes Against Journalists https:/ /www.unesco.org/archives/multimedia/document-5556
212   Article19. 2017. Prevent – Protect – Prosecute: Acting on UN Human Rights Council Resolution 33/2 2017  
https:/ /www.article19.org/wp-content/uploads/2017 /09/Safety-of-Journalists-guide.pdf
162 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents5. Allow encryption and anonymity.
6. Protect journalists’ confidential sources.
7. T rain key stakeholders (including judges, law enforcement, military, journalists, and civil society) 
on the States’ international legal obligations and commitments on the safety of journalists.
Under the duty to protect, States are required to:
1.  Publicly, unequivocally, and systematically condemn violence and attacks.
2. Establish early warning systems and rapid response mechanisms.
3. Regularly monitor and report on attacks against journalists.
4. Protect journalists covering protests and elections.
5. Protect media outlets against attacks and forced closure.
6. Protect journalists in armed conflict as civilians.
7. Recognise the role of media organisations in advancing safety.
Under the duty to prosecute, States are required to:
1. Adopt strategies to combat impunity.
2. Investigate.
3. Prosecute.
4. Ensure victims of crimes against journalists and their families have access to appropriate 
remedies.
5. Reinvigorate their efforts to effectively implement the international human rights framework on the 
safety of journalists.
Discussion points
	` Under your State’s laws what are your LEA’s requirements in relation to journalists’  
safety, in terms of:
	` Prevent?
	` Protect?
	` Prosecute?
| 163
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 66.3 Protecting others
6.3. 1 Protecting sources and whistleblowers
The protection of journalistic sources is central to the ability of journalists to properly investigate 
stories, as well as for the protection of individuals and whistleblowers who provide information to 
them.213 Attempts by state institutions to compel the disclosure of sources hinders the free flow of 
information.
The protection of journalistic sources is a cornerstone of freedom of the press and the disclosure 
of sources has a negative impact of journalists’ ability to act as a public watchdog and do their job 
properly. Exposure of sources, not only endangers those who have helped to shine a light on criminality, 
malpractice and corruption, but the very threat of exposure can stifle freedom of speech and the flow 
of information about such matters whether in person, or online. 
General comment No. 34 to the ICCPR states that parties “should recognise and respect that 
element of the right of freedom of expression that embraces the limited journalistic privilege not to 
disclose sources.” 214 
Misuse of law enforcement powers such as public order laws, and anti-terrorism and security 
legislation, are some of the ways in which LEAs obtain identifying information about sources. However, 
forcing disclosure will impact not only on the reputation of the journalist and the trust sources may have 
in them, but also on potential future sources of information that is in the public interest.
Only in extremely limited cases, a judicial court order following the application of the three-part test 
and the necessary public interest test could consider to ask a journalist to disclose their sources. 
Advances in technology and in communications via digital platforms in the last decade, has made 
networking and communications between individuals and groups much easier. This is a positive in 
many ways for journalists but it has also resulted in new methods of surveillance on communications 
by state and non-state actors. 
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has emphasised that journalists are particularly 
vulnerable to becoming targets of unlawful or arbitrary surveillance and/or interception of 
communications that is in violation of their rights to privacy and freedom of expression.215 
UNESCO framework – How to protect journalistic sources: 
Recognise the value to the public interest of source protection, with its legal 
foundation in the right to freedom of expression (including press freedom), 
and to privacy. These protections should also be embedded within a country’s 
constitution and/or national law.
213   For a more detailed reading on strengthening protection of whistleblowing, see: UNESCO. 2022. Journalism and whistleblowing: an important tool to protect 
human rights, fight corruption, and strengthen democracy. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381406
214   OHCHR. 2011. CCPR/C/GC/34 General comment No. 34 – Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression  
https:/ /www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/gc34.pdf  para 45
215  OHCHR. 2021. Use of spyware to surveil journalists and human rights defenders: Statement by UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle 
Bachelet. https:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/2021/07 /use-spyware-surveil-journalists-and-human-rights-defendersstatement-un-high-commission -
er?LangID=E&NewsID=27326
164 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsRecognise that source protection should extend to all acts of journalism and 
across all platforms, services and mediums (of data storage and publication), and 
that it includes digital data and meta-data.
Recognise that source protection does not entail registration or licensing of 
practitioners of journalism.
Recognise the potential detrimental impact on public interest journalism, and on 
society, of source-related information being caught up in bulk data recording, 
tracking, storage and collection.
Affirm that State and corporate actors (including third-party intermediaries), who 
capture journalistic digital data must treat it confidentially (also acknowledging the 
desirability of the storage and use of such data being consistent with the general 
right to privacy).
Shield acts of journalism from targeted surveillance, data retention and handover 
of material connected to confidential sources.
Define exceptions to all the above very narrowly so as to preserve the principle of 
source protection as the effective norm and standard.
Define exceptions as needing to conform to a provision of “necessity” and 
“proportionality”. In other words, when no alternative to disclosure is possible, 
when there is a greater public interest in disclosure than in protection, and when the 
terms and extent of disclosure still preserve confidentiality as much as possible.
Define a transparent and independent judicial process with appeal potential for 
authorised exceptions, and ensure that law-enforcement agents and judicial 
actors are educated about the principles involved.
Criminalise arbitrary, unauthorised and wilful violations of confidentiality of sources 
by third-party actors.
Recognise that source protection laws can be strengthened by complementary 
whistleblower legislation.216 
UNESCO has also identified a gender dimension in relation to source protection in recent times. Female 
journalists can face additional risks in the course of their work, both online and offline: in the physical 
realm, these risks include sexual harassment, physical assault and rape, which may limit their physical 
mobility; and the digital sphere, acts of harassment and threats of violence are rampant.217  Similarly, 
female sources face increased risks when acting as whistleblowers or confidential informants. As 
such, women journalists need to be able to rely on secure, non-physical forms of communications with 
their sources, in particular secure digital communications, to be able to engage with their sources.
216  UNESCO. 2017. Protecting journalism sources in the digital age. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000248054  
217   UNESCO. 2021. The Chilling: global trends in online violence against women journalists; research discussion paper  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000377223
| 165
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 6Discussion points
	` Why is it important to recognise the need to protect journalists’ sources?
	` What conflicts or difficulties might this cause for law enforcement officers when  
investigating crimes?
6.3.2 Protecting victims, next-of-kin and witnesses
Victims and the next of kin of those caught up in violent crime (including homicide) and witnesses to 
serious crimes are a particular category of people who may need significant protection including 
the withholding of information from journalists. T o be able to properly report stories, journalists need 
comments, photographs, background information, and – where possible – eye-witnesses to add detail 
and depth to the story. 
Personal information about victims (in non-fatal cases), next-of-kin and witnesses, should routinely be 
withheld from journalists. However, it is often the case that identity details may already be in the public 
domain, particularly where offences are committed in small communities. In such cases, the potential 
for journalists to proactively attend whole addresses or places of work to seek dynamic comment from 
this group of people is high. 
If the identity of any deceased is not in the public domain, there should be an official process of next-of-
kin notification prior to any disclosure in any form in any circumstances. In many countries, the details 
of victims who are deceased, become a matter of public record when their deaths are recorded, and 
possibly an inquest opened to look at the circumstances around their death. Thus, it is usual to release 
details of these victims to journalists. The interest of the media usually then shifts to the victim’s next-
of-kin. 
In cases where there is media interest in victims, next-of-kin or significant witnesses (and where 
speaking to the media is not likely to prejudice either the investigation or later proceedings), it is worth 
considering how LEAs can mitigate the impact of media interest. 
Except instances where there is a high risk to the next-of-kin of being identified, law enforcement 
should consider the benefits of agreeing on a level of contact between victims/next-of-kin/witnesses 
and the media, that satisfies their immediate demand for information but does not expose the subject 
to unnecessary intrusion at what may be a difficult time. It is common practice for example in some 
jurisdictions for police officers, on behalf of next-of-kin, to:
	` issue pre-prepared statements from the next-of-kin to the media;
	` provide photographs of victims and other family members under controlled circumstances;
	` facilitate photocalls with a limited number of journalists present, on the understanding that it is 
distributed to all media outlets who wish to have it.
These kinds of arrangements with the media need careful management and should be recorded in 
writing and agreed with all participants in advance of any contact of the sort described in the bullet 
points above taking place.
166 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents6.4 Investigating crimes against journalists
In combating impunity, states must gather to strengthen 
prosecutorial services and effective investigations against all 
alleged threats and killings against journalists.”
Professor Can Yeginsu, Member of the International Bar Association and Deputy Chair of the High Level Panel of Legal 
Experts on Media Freedom218  
Because of the particular nature of their work, when threats are made or crimes committed against 
journalists, it is important that at an early stage, the investigation looks at a contextual analysis of the 
possible relationship between the alleged crime and the activities and work of the victim (past and 
present) and uses that analysis to frame the overall investigative strategy.219 
Equally, the nature of journalists’ work, (particularly that of investigative journalists) means that there 
are peculiar elements to the investigations of crimes against them – for example, the confidentiality and 
protection of their sources. Similarly, crimes against journalists (depending on the nature of their work), 
can also have a transnational dimension that necessitates the sharing of information and cooperation 
with law enforcement agencies in other countries. As the Global Pledge on Media Freedom states, “In 
the face of threats to media freedom that are new in scale and in nature, we must adopt new forms of 
collaboration that adapt to new realities.”  220 
Independent and effective investigation
The basic principles in the independent and effective investigation in the case of a 
crime against journalist:
	`Investigating officers and their organisations should be entirely independent 
from any individual or public body implicated in the crime. When there are 
credible allegations of the involvement of State agents, the investigation should 
be carried out by an authority outside of the jurisdiction or sphere of influence of 
those authorities, and the investigators should be able to explore all allegations 
fully. 
	`Effectiveness requires establishing a connection between an offender’s motive 
and the journalists’ work early on and looking to hold those who incite and plan 
the violence, as well as direct perpetrators, accountable.
218   International Bar Association. 2021. International Day to End Impunity for Crimes Against Journalists: The High Level Panel of Legal Experts on Media Freedom 
calls for creation of international investigative task force. https:/ /www.ibanet.org/The-High-Level-Panel-of-Legal-Experts-on-Media-Freedom-calls-for-crea -
tion-of-international-investigative-task-force
219  UNESCO. 2020. Guidelines for prosecutors on cases of crimes against journalists. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000375138 , p.6.
220   GOV.UK. 2019. Global Pledge on Media Freedom. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/publications/global-pledge-on-media-freedom/global-pledge-on-media-freedom
| 167
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 6	`Officers assigned to investigations into threats or crimes against journalists 
should understand the need to quickly preserve and collect digital (phones, 
tablets, messages, social media accounts), as well as physical evidence. 
	`The victims, or in case of death, abduction or disappearance, the next of kin, 
should be afforded effective access to the procedure and regular updates on the 
progress of the investigation. In some countries, investigators appoint an officer 
(a Family Liaison Officer) whose role is to support the victim’s family throughout 
the investigation and prosecution. 
	`Where the victim is reluctant to provide a statement (for fear of reprisals) 
investigators should explore the potential for proceeding without the victim’s 
cooperation. 
	`Best practice in many countries is that there is robust support for witnesses from 
law enforcement organisations and external, charitable agencies. Support 
offered includes witness protection programmes in which vulnerable witnesses 
are given new identities, being able to give evidence in court by video link, or from 
behind a screen.
	`Where the seriousness of the situation warrants it, in particular in cases of 
frequent and recurrent crimes against freedom of expression, consideration 
should be given to establishing specialised and dedicated investigative units – 
with sufficient resources and appropriate training to operate efficiently and 
effectively – to investigate crimes against freedom of expression. 
	`Civil society organisations should be able to lodge complaints about crimes 
against freedom of expression – of particular importance in cases involving 
killings, abductions or disappearances where the next of kin are unwilling or 
unable to do so – and intervene in the criminal proceedings. 
	`When there are credible allegations of the involvement of State agents, the 
investigation should be carried out by an authority outside of the jurisdiction or 
sphere of influence of those authorities, and the investigators should be able to 
explore all allegations fully.221  
The independence of investigations from any person or body in any way connected to the motive or 
suspect strategy is an obvious requirement but potentially difficult to implement, particularly where 
large public organisations are involved. There are two aspects to independence and investigators 
should seek to achieve both: 
Visible independence needs investigators to make arrangements for the work that creates an outward 
appearance of independence. This may include opening separate office accommodation and perhaps 
bringing in investigators from another region. 
221   See OSCE. 2012. Joint Declaration on Crimes Against Freedom of Expression. https:/ /www.osce.org/representative-on-freedom-of-media/91595 , and CoE. 
2020. How to protect journalists and other media actors? – Implementation Guide. https:/ /edoc.coe.int/en/media/8283-how-to-protect-journalists-and-other-
media-actors.html
168 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsActual independence builds on the notion of visibility by creating the conditions for full independent 
investigations to take place. Achieving this level may be challenging, particularly when investigators are 
relatively junior in an organisational structure and middle and senior managers should work to ensure 
that organisations respond appropriately in supportive junior officers tasked with investigations of 
crimes against journalists.
However, Investigators should also consider encouraging and facilitating judicial oversight of 
investigations, to ensure that a comprehensive investigative strategy can be agreed between 
investigators and prosecutors. UNESCO’s Guidelines for Prosecutors in Cases of Crimes Against 
Journalists is clear in its direction that the judiciary can help law enforcement officers by:
1. “providing insight on the conduct or supervision of investigations and advisory assistance to law 
enforcement agencies;
2. “identifying stages and determination for proceedings in cases of crimes against journalists and 
preserving the integrity of evidence.” 222 
 
Case Study – A family’s view of good practice’  
investigations of crimes against journalists 
Daphne Caruana Galizia was a Maltese writer, investigative reporter and blogger. On 16th 
October 2017 , she was killed by a car bomb attack close to her home in Malta. Her reporting 
focused primarily on the political elite in Malta with particular focus on corruption, nepotism, 
patronage, money laundering and organised crime. 
In July 2021, an independent judicial inquiry into Caruana Galizia’s murder found the Maltese 
state responsible for creating a climate of impunity in the country that allowed her to be killed. 
	` Daphne’s sister, Corinne believes there should be an immediate response from the police 
when a crime is committed against journalists – particularly when they are serious.223 
	` “The first – and possibly most important – question has to be, ‘what were they working on?’”, 
says Corinne. “Who were they exposing? because it makes sense that you should start 
there.” 224  Indeed, the recommendations of the Public Inquiry that followed Daphne’s murder, 
included that officers should have an ability to assess risk and linkages, in the context of a 
journalist’s work present and past.225 
	` Consideration must also be given to gender-specific dangers faced by journalists. Daphne 
was clear before her death that much of the harassment she was subjected to, was gender 
related.226 
	` LEAs should have the capacity to ‘horizon scan’ potentially volatile situations that might 
follow the publication or broadcasting of investigative journalists’ work, so that they are able 
to either precipitate a crime, or be ready when it happens.227 
	` Following a crime or threat, a dedicated liaison officer for the victim or family of the victim 
should be appointed immediately. 
222   UNESCO. 2020. Guidelines for prosecutors on cases of crimes against journalists. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000375138
223  Corinne Vella interview with authors, 3 November 2021
224  Corinne Vella interview with authors, 3 November 2021
225   See Doughty Street Chambers. Conclusion and Recommendations provided by the Daphne Caruana Galizia Foundation. https://www.doughtystreet.co.uk/sites/
default/files/media/document/PI%20Report%20Partial%20T ranslation%20%28002%29_0.pdf
226  Ibid
227  Ibid
| 169
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 6Journalists’ work is increasingly based on using digital forms of information gathering and storage. In 
the early stages of investigations, investigators should take all possible steps to secure such evidence 
in line with the joint declaration above, however, critically should seek specialist advice to ensure that 
methods for securing evidence do not compromise or endanger the content of it and, at the same time, 
guarantees the confidentiality of journalists’ sources.
When possible, investigators must inform the victim and family of victim, of the development of 
investigation. In addition to liaison and communication with victims and witnesses, investigators 
must consider, as part of their investigative strategy, the need to protect these people from the risk of 
reprisal, intimidation and undue influence. Investigators should also consider lower-level support to 
victims and witnesses, including steps such as target hardening of home addresses with locks and 
security, CCTV installation and helpline / telephone ‘helpline’ support. 
As with all criminal matters, the need for effective communication and the considered release 
of information to the media as investigations into crimes against journalists progress cannot be 
understated. Chapter 7 below provides guidance on how the relationship on release of information 
can be effectively managed.
The Joint Declaration recommendation on establishing specialised units to potentially deal with 
crimes that impact upon freedom of expression, clearly expresses the notion of independence and 
the need to expedite investigations in order to maintain visible and actual credibility in the face of 
victims, their next-of-kin and witnesses.228  Where building such teams may be difficult, senior officers 
and investigators can work towards the joint declaration recommendation and mitigate the gap by 
ensuring that a number of investigators, normally engaged in routine inquiry work are trained to a 
higher standard and given a wider skill base that can be tapped into when the circumstances – such as 
a crime against a journalist – demands. 
The Joint Declaration touches on the potential role of civil society organisations in reporting crimes 
against freedom of expression – in this context, journalists as victims. Some LEAs, for example, now 
allow for third party reporting, telephone and electronic reporting through websites and this ensures 
that those suffering intimidation, threats and violence are more likely to make complaints and instigate 
investigations.
Discussion points
	` What are the key considerations when a crime has been committed against a journalist?
	` Discuss what you think ‘good practice’ should look like in your local context.
	` What might victims or families want from law enforcement officers?
228   OSCE. 2012. International Mechanisms for Promoting Freedom of Expression: Joint declaration on crimes against freedom of expression.  
https:/ /www.osce.org/representative-on-freedom-of-media/91595  
170 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents6.4. 1 Examples of Investigation Initiatives
Below are several examples of initiatives being taken with regards to investigating crimes against 
journalists.229 
In the Netherlands, in cases involving the lethal use of force by police officers, independence of the 
investigation is ensured through the specialised State Criminal Investigation Department, which 
carries out such investigations instead of local police. The Department and the local public prosecutor 
must be informed immediately. If there is a strong connection between the local prosecutor and the 
police officers under investigation, the Chief Public Prosecutor may re-appoint. The final decision to 
prosecute lies with the Chief Public Prosecutor, not locally.
In the Czech Republic, if a claim against a police officer is brought alleging the commission of a crime, a 
separate entity (General Inspection of Security Forces) is responsible for its investigation.
In Colombia, the Public Prosecutor’s Office has a special sub-unit that conducts investigations into 
crimes committed against journalists. 
In Serbia, the Public Prosecution Office issued in 2015 an instruction giving high priority to criminal 
offences committed against persons performing work in the area of information and requiring 
collection of statistics on such cases. It is also in the process of issuing a new mandatory instruction 
providing guidelines on how to proceed in relation to crimes against journalists, also envisaging high 
priority for these cases. Serbia has also set up a Standing Working Group on Journalist Safety, which 
aims to ensure rapid and efficient communication between the Public Prosecutor’s Office, the Ministry 
of Interior and journalists’ associations when journalists are threatened or attacked. Contact points 
were established within their administrations to ensure faster reporting and resolution of such cases. 
Somalia has announced that it also has created a special agency to investigate and prosecute crimes 
against journalists called The Office of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Journalists.230 
In Mexico, the Special prosecutor for crimes against freedom of expression has the authority to direct, 
coordinate and supervise investigations and, where appropriate, the prosecution of crimes committed 
against journalists.
229   These examples (Netherlands, Czech Republic, Colombia, Ukraine, Serbia) have been taken directly from CoE. 2020. How to protect journalists and other media 
actors? – Implementation Guide. https:/ /edoc.coe.int/en/media/8283-how-to-protect-journalists-and-other-media-actors.html , pp. 55-58. This document 
provides many other examples of practical initiatives and is recommended reading
230   Anadolu Agency. 29 September 2020. Somalia moves to prosecute crimes against journalists  
https://www.aa.com.tr/en/africa/somalia-moves-to-prosecute-crimes-against-journalists/1968032
| 171
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 6Case Study – Mexico
In 2020, the first convictions were delivered by the Special Prosecutor’s Office for the Attention 
to Crimes Committed against Freedom of Expression (FEADLE) in Mexico. 
In 2017 , the murders of two prominent investigative journalists, Miroslava Breach and Javier 
Valdez rocked the country. Both of them had reported on the ties between networks of drug 
traffickers and politicians in their respective states, and both had received threats for doing 
their work, before being murdered at the hands of organized criminals. Their deaths provoked 
the public to demonstrate and brought unprecedented pressure on the government, law 
enforcement and judiciary from local and international media. 
The cases were handled by FEADLE, working in collaboration with representatives of the 
victims. Ricardo Sanchez Pérez del Pozo, the head of FEADLE says: “The Prosecutor’s Office 
has investigators who are able to carry out contextual analysis that allows for the identification 
and review of the victim’s journalistic work, with the aim of establishing a possible motive for the 
homicide and its relation to freedom of expression. Thus, in both these cases, the prosecution 
was able to present evidence that proved the link between the threats and violence, and the 
journalists’ right to freedom of expression.
“The information analyst for the cases was presented as an expert witness in the trials. For 
example, in the case of Javier Valdez, the analyst reviewed all the articles signed by the victim, 
the articles published by the media outlet of which he was the founder and main editor, as well 
as the articles of other media outlets that published on the same topics. This work made it 
possible to identify the context in which the articles were published, the interests that could 
have been affected and the journalistic impact of the victim’s work. The judge was able to prove 
with a concrete narrative how the victim’s journalistic work was directly interrelated with the 
aggressors.” 231 
In 2020, the first convictions were delivered. In the case of Javier Valdez, the person who drove 
the killers was sentenced to 14 years and 8 months in prison. In Miroslava’s case, one of those 
who planned the crime was sentenced to 50 years in prison.232 
In 2021, one of those who planned the murder of Javier Valdez, and a mayor who helped the 
murderers of Miroslava Breach were sentenced.233 
Now, prosecutors and analysts assigned to FEADLE are certified with ‘specialisation in the 
investigation of crimes committed against journalists for their work.’ Prosecutors, analysts and 
LEAs specialising in these types of investigations receive continuous training to strengthen 
investigative and litigation capabilities. 
231   UNESCO. 2021. Recent convictions highlight the work of Mexico’s Prosecutor Office dedicated to crimes against freedom of expression.  
https:/ /en.unesco.org/news/recent-convictions-highlight-work-mexicos-prosecutor-office-dedicated-crimes-against-freedom
232   Ibid
233   Ibid
172 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents6.5 Intelligence and evidence within the Law
Effective intelligence gathering, management and the operational response to intelligence are key 
aspects of any criminal investigation. Properly obtained intelligence that is focused and actionable can 
move criminal investigations forward substantially in short periods of time. In democratic countries, 
intelligence gathering is regulated by law. Legislation sets out the boundaries of what investigators 
can do, the methods they use and the way in which they store intelligence. Intelligence gathered from 
sensitive sources, such as personal surveillance and data interception tend to be regulated at a higher 
level of legislation to minimise the risk of unnecessary intrusion into the private lives of citizens.
The increasing use of technology, including artificial intelligence (AI) to gather and sift information 
and intelligence in criminal investigations brings with it a range of benefits for investigators, victims 
and society in general. Investigations supported by technological tools and AI can seek intelligence 
from a wider range of sources, sort and present data in ways that allow investigators to progress 
much more quickly. For example, facial recognition technology (FRT) now means that those who 
present a risk can be identified in crowds, with significant benefit for public security at large events 
and around transport hubs. 
However, technology and AI does not come without risk to public freedoms. Increased reliance on 
AI and technology by justice systems can lead to disproportionate targeting of certain elements of 
the community with unfair outcomes (see Module 1 -1.7 .3 Digital technology).
Artificial Intelligence in criminal investigations
In the US, the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions 
system (COMPAS), developed by a private company, is used by a number of 
jurisdictions to assess offenders’ likelihood of re-offending. COMPAS is based on 
an algorithm that takes its information from 137 standard questions with its outputs 
used in sentencing decisions, amongst other things. 
A key controversy is that the system influences sentencing decisions yet its inner 
workings cannot be examined or appealed and other doubts have been cast 
over the fairness of using COMPAS in this way. Following a 2013 case in which 
COMPAS identified a defendant as being at high risk of re-offending and a more 
severe sentence handed down, the Wisconsin Supreme Court urged caution and 
scepticism in use of the algorithm. Julia Dressel and Hany Farid from Dartmouth 
College have shown that COMPAS is no better at predicting risk of re-offending than 
random people recruited from the internet.234  In 2016, the technology reporter Julia 
Angwin and colleagues at ProPublica analysed COMPAS assessments for more 
than 7 ,000 arrestees in Broward County, Florida, and published an investigation 
claiming that the algorithm was biased against African Americans.235 
234   The Atlantic. 2018. A Popular Algorithm Is No Better at Predicting Crimes Than Random People.  
https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/01/equivant-compas-algorithm/550646/
235  Propublica.org. 2016. Machine Bias. https:/ /www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing
| 173
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 6In 2019, the Commissioner on Personal Data Protection in Serbia cautioned that 
the Serbian Government did not have a legal basis for data processing of biometric 
personal data collected by video surveillance of public spaces. The use of FRT  
in public spaces can allow governments to track and monitor people’s habits  
and movements, creating potential adverse effects on freedoms of expression  
and assembly.236 
As a result of issues like these, in some locations, including San Francisco and 
Portland in the US, the use of FRT by public bodies has been banned.237  
When dealing with journalists, investigators must be particularly careful in how they seek to gather and 
use intelligence material. It may be the case that investigators seek access to information, accounts of 
incidents or details of sources for legitimate reasons connected to the investigation and with the sole 
purpose of activating the prosecution process against perpetrators. Journalists as victims, and their 
next of kin, however may have a different view of such requests, feeling that, instead of being involved 
in gathering legitimate intelligence relating to the offence committed against them, investigators are 
actually involved in a wider intelligence sweep aimed at gathering whatever journalistic material and 
information on sources can be accessed.
The need for rapport building and effective communication in cases of crimes against journalists 
is thus evident: investigators should be aware that they must not be perceived as acting beyond the 
local legal framework, and the mere suspicion, however poorly founded, that they are doing so, can be 
sufficient to stall investigations into crimes against journalists.
When progressing cases involving victimisation of journalists, and seeking access to information in 
order to obtain intelligence, investigators must: 
	` Establish effective relationships with victims and next-of-kin from the outset and before any 
intelligence requirements emerge.
	` Be aware of the relevant local legal framework relating to intelligence gathering and demonstrate 
this when dealing with victims and next of kin. This will promote mutual confidence.
	` When seeking access to intelligence from journalists’ archives, be aware of how ‘journalistic 
material’ as a special category of information is defined and provided for in the law locally.
	` Where possible, and whilst considering the need to avoid compromising the investigation, work 
with journalists (victims) and next of kin to explain the access sought, the reasons for it and the 
boundaries.
	` In making approaches to victims and next of kin for access to information for intelligence 
purposes, focus on the specific information sought (or at least its broad category) and the 
potential outcomes for the investigations. 
	` Refrain from concluding that refusal or reluctance to agree to access to journalists’ archives or 
specifically journalistic information is a sign of unwillingness to cooperate or defensiveness. 
Instead, consider how the request could have been framed differently.
236   European Digital Rights (EDRi). 2019. Serbia: Unlawful facial recognition video surveillance in Belgrade  
https:/ /edri.org/our-work/serbia-unlawful-facial-recognition-video-surveillance-in-belgrade/
237   The Guardian. 2019. San Francisco was right to ban facial recognition. Surveillance is a real danger  
https:/ /www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/may/30/san-francisco-ban-facial-recognition-surveillance
174 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents	` When engaged in gathering intelligence from journalists’ archives, work within the law and focus 
on the investigation at hand, working to a pre-determined intelligence collection plan (ICP). Don’t 
be tempted to exceed the ICP in order to gather material of more general or speculative interest.
	` Plan ahead for storing the intelligence gained securely separately from the main body of 
intelligence material from other sources attached to the investigation.
6.5. 1 Access to crime scenes 
It is the role of an LEA to secure, or ‘own’ a crime scene.238  This may involve environmental controls, 
specialist equipment, detailed recording and strict entry and exit protocols, with the site cordoned off 
with police tape, crime scene tape or barricade tape.
However, due to their very nature, crime scenes are often of interest to journalists. LEAs may however 
establish a secure media perimeter where journalists are safe to do their job without hampering the 
investigation (see Module 5 – Media Perimeter). 
Even if there may not be specific laws regarding access to crime scenes, public access to such 
officially declared sites may be legally limited through other legal recourse, such as ‘interfering with an 
investigation’ or ‘tampering with evidence’. 
238   UNODC, 2008, Toolkit to Combat Trafficking in Persons. https:/ /www.unodc.org/e4j/data/ _university_uni_/toolkit_to_combat_trafficking_in_persons.html , pp. 193-194
| 175
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 66.6 Preventing prejudice of proceedings
Investigations into crimes against journalists must also conclude with timely, successful prosecutions 
and appropriate punishment for those responsible, in order to demonstrate the intolerance of society 
for these crimes and avoid giving rise to impunity for such offences. Successful prosecutions of 
perpetrators can not only bring some sense of justice being delivered for victims or their families and 
uphold the public’s trust in the justice system, but they can also act as a deterrent to others.
LEAs have an important role in ensuring that the administration of justice is not obstructed, nor delayed. 
For example, under principles 40 to 45 of the Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression in 
Africa, the African Commission identifies attacks on media practitioners as a violation of the right to 
freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 9. These principles contain the following provisions that 
make the action of LEAs, or lack of action by them, a responsibility of the state:
The conduct of law enforcement, security, intelligence, and 
military personnel which threaten, undermine, or violate the 
safety of journalists and other media practitioners shall be the 
responsibility of the State. Accordingly, States shall be liable 
for such conduct where no action or insufficient action has 
been taken to investigate such attacks, prosecute and punish 
perpetrators, and provide victims with effective remedies.” 239  
LEAs must also give consideration to measures that can be put in place for the protection of victims 
and key witnesses in order to ensure they are free from interference, and able to give their evidence 
in proceedings. These may include providing police protection prior to legal proceedings starting, 
using pseudonyms for witnesses in court, giving evidence from behind a screen, giving evidence by 
video link or entry into a witness protection programme. As most of these measures must be agreed 
with the judge, it is important to ensure there is close liaison and consultation with counsel and the 
judge at an early stage.
Where the accused is a state ‘agent’, it is even more important that the rule of law is upheld and that 
punishments are appropriate and consistent with those given to non-state agents. Whilst sentencing 
is not a matter for LEAs, they can ensure they fulfil their roles by ensuring investigations into these 
crimes also have consistency, regardless of the perpetrator. 
Discussion points
	` Why is it important that there are successful investigation and prosecutions of crimes against 
journalists? 
	` Looking at your local context, what measures might be available to officers to help protect 
legal proceedings?
239   African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights. 2019. Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information in Africa  
https://www.achpr.org/legalinstruments/detail?id=69
176 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents6.7 Activities
The following activities enable trainers to: 
	` Determine the participants’ understanding of their role in investigating crimes against journalists.
	`  Encourage the participants to review their investigative techniques regarding specific crimes 
against journalists.
	`  Assess the participants’ approach to families and victims with regards to investigations.
6.7. 1 Activity – Protecting journalists
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions,  
with one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group 
presentations are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants 
on their conclusions.
1.  There is a large-scale public demonstration highlighting alleged state corruption taking place in 
three days’ time. Members of the media will be covering the event, including two journalists who 
have been reporting prolifically on the issue. What measures would you put in place to prevent 
attacks taking place, (whilst allowing them to do their jobs):
 a. for the wider group of journalists;
 b. for the two particular journalists mentioned. 
2.  Imagine you have received a phone call from a journalist, who fears for their safety having received 
threats online. What would be your strategy for: 
 a.  Providing protection for the journalist? Consider what you can do in your own local law 
enforcement context;
 b. Investigating the threats? Consider what you can do in your own local law enforcement context;
 c.  What issues or potential problems might you need to consider in developing both these 
strategies?
| 177
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 66.7.2 Activity – Investigating crimes against journalists
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions, 
with one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group 
presentations are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants 
on their conclusions.
Y ou are investigating the homicide of a female journalist, who has reported on stories about significant 
criminal networks distributing drugs, which may have connections to local politicians. 
1.  Identify the key features of an intelligence strategy to support the investigation of the murder of the 
journalist.
2.  You have established family liaison with the next-of-kin for the victim. You believe there may be 
material of value as intelligence contained within her archive of information. What factors would 
you take into account when considering approaching the next-of-kin for access to the material and 
how would you frame the conversation and request with the family?
3. Draft an intelligence collection plan to inform the discussion with the family.
178 |
Module 6  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsModule 7
Access to, release and  
withholding of information
T able of Contents
Key points | 181
7 .1 Introduction  | 182
7 .2 General Principles  | 183
7.2.1   Access to information under public access to information laws | 183
7.2.2  The principle of maximum disclosure of information | 186
7 .2.3 Balancing ‘maximum disclosure’ and the need  
to maintain public order | 187
7 .3 Access and Release of Information | 189
7 .3.1 Ethical good practice principles for release of information | 189
7 .3.2 Who should release information to journalists? | 189
7 .3.3 How information should be released  | 190
7 .3.4  Databases and electronically-held information  | 191
7.3.5   Journalists’ access to private communications by LEA officers | 192
7 .3.6  The right to privacy from journalistic and other intrusion | 192
7 .4   Withholding Information from the Media and the Public  | 194
7 .4.1  Legitimate basis for withholding information  | 194
7 .4.2  Personal information and biometric data  | 195
7 .4.3 Surveillance material | 197
7 .4.4 Crime scenes | 201
7 .4.5  Seizures of journalistic material  | 202
7 .5 Activities | 204
7 .5.1 Activity – Release of information | 204
7.5.2   Activity – Balancing access to information and rule of law | 205
7 .5.3 Activity – Personal information | 205
| 179
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7Module aims
 `T o be able to apply considerations  
around the release or withholding of 
information by LEAs.
 `T o understand the importance of 
managing and recording the decision-
making process.
 `T o consider the ways in which positive 
relationships with journalists can be 
managed.
180 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsKey points
	`The principle of ‘maximum disclosure’ has several benefits for LEAs, including 
enhancing police transparency and accountability. LEAs must follow this principle 
as much as possible, subject only to narrow exceptions.
	`Information about misconduct by LEAs should be released to the public, except 
where it would jeopardise ongoing investigations or prosecution (see Module 3 
– Communicating with the Media and Public). 
	`LEAs should understand that journalists (and members of the public) have a legal 
right to request information, often via Access to Information Laws, from their 
organisations.
	`LEAs should take great care when considering requests for disclosure of 
information from electronic and digital databases; the information held is easily 
processed and rapid processing can lead to inappropriate disclosures.
	`Journalistic material is conventionally protected by courts internationally and the 
seizure of it should be considered an important act that should require some form 
of court order or warrant in advance.
	`The disclosure of material acquired through mass surveillance should be carefully 
considered as it inevitably will contain private information (a person’s movements, 
location or actions) of many citizens. Equally, the public should be clearly notified of 
any such mass surveillance.
| 181
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 77. 1 Introduction 
The right to access to information is a fundamental right. In its very first session in 1946, the UN General 
Assembly adopted Resolution 59(I), stating, “Freedom of information is a fundamental human right and 
... the touchstone of all the freedoms to which the United Nations is consecrated.” Abid Hussain, the UN 
Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, elaborated on this in his 1995 Report to 
the UN Commission on Human Rights, stating:
Freedom will be bereft of all effectiveness if the people have 
no access to information. Access to information is basic to the 
democratic way of life. The tendency to withhold information 
from the people at large is therefore to be strongly 
checked.”  240 
Whilst these rights apply to all members of the public, journalists are of course, the conduit through 
whom most members of the public obtain their information (or news) about public services, crime and 
law and order. The work of journalists in holding public servants to account by open and fair reporting 
to the wider public and scrutiny on behalf of the public, is a fundamental part of a healthy democracy.
By improving their relationships with the media and journalists, who enhance transparency and 
accountability of public institutions, LEAs can improve their relations with citizens. However, the growth 
of social media has also allowed misinformation, disinformation and mal-information to be spread 
quickly and easily, creating potential problems for those (such as LEAs) who are seeking to protect 
communities from harm, and to establish or communicate facts. This makes it even more important 
for LEAs to ensure they are trusted sources of official information about security and policing issues.
240  UN. 1994. E/CN.4/1995/32 https:/ /documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G94/750/76/PDF/G9475076.pdf , para. 35
182 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents7.2 General Principles 
We should always strive to build and maintain the 
credibility of the police forces, even in the most difficult 
circumstances. We should not say everything, but everything 
we say must be true.”
Ian Lafreniere, Member of the National Assembly of Quebec. Formerly Director of Corporate Communications,  
City of Montreal Police Service, Canada241 
7.2. 1  Access to information under public access to informa -
tion laws
At the UN level, three main documents establish the basic soft law parameters regarding the 
interpretation and implementation of the right of access to information at the national level by the 
executive, legislative and the judiciary branches. These documents include: 
	` General Comment No. 34, by the UN Human Rights Committee.242 
	` Report to the UN General Assembly of the Special Rapporteur on the protection and promotion 
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. 29 January 1999.243 
	` Report to the UN General Assembly of the Special Rapporteur on the protection and promotion 
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. 4 September 2013.244 
	` United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals. 16: Promote Just, Peaceful and Inclusive 
Societies.245 
Several other international bodies with responsibility for promoting and protecting human rights have 
recognised the fundamental human right to access information held by public bodies, as well as called 
on Member States to adopt effective legislation to guarantee respect for that right in practice.246  These 
include regional human rights courts such as the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, African Court 
on Human and Peoples’ Rights and European Court of Human Rights; regional mechanisms including 
the Organization of American States, the Council of Europe and the African Union; and international 
bodies such as the Commonwealth. 
In 2004, the three special mandates on freedom of expression – the UN Special Rapporteur on 
Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media and the 
OAS Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression – adopted a Joint Declaration which elaborated 
further on the right to information, stating:
241   UNESCO. 2018. Freedom of Expression and Public Order: Fostering the Relationship Between Security Forces and Journalists.  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000261467
242  OHCHR. 2011. CCPR/C/GC/34. General comment no. 34, Article 19, Freedoms of opinion and expression. https:/ /digitallibrary.un.org/record/715606
243  UN ECOSOC. 1999. E/CN.4/1999/64. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the protection and promotion of the right to freedom of opinion and expression  
https:/ /undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=E%2FCN.4%2F1999%2F64&Language=E&Device T ype=Desktop&LangRequested=False
244  UNGA. 2013. A/68/362. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression  
https:/ /undocs.org/A/68/362
245  Available at: https:/ /sdgs.un.org/goals/goal16
246  UNESCO. 2008. Freedom of information: a comparative legal survey. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000158450 , p.7
| 183
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7The right to access information held by public authorities is a 
fundamental human right which should be given effect at the 
national level through comprehensive legislation (for example 
Freedom of Information Acts) based on the principle of 
maximum disclosure, establishing a presumption that all 
information is accessible subject only to a narrow system of 
exceptions.”  247 
Further, the UN ‘Sustainable Development Goal 16’ has a target, 16.10, which aims to ‘ensure public 
access to information, and protect fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and 
international agreements’248  as a means to ensure accountable, inclusive and just institutions.
In particular, SDG Indicator 16.10.2, and its related metadata guidance developed by UNESCO as 
the UN custodian agency for this indicator, seek to measure and monitor the ‘Number of countries 
that adopt and implement constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to 
information’,249  and forms a core contribution to the advancement of “peace, justice and strong 
institutions”.
International standards follow some general principles on the right of access to public information 
namely: a strong presumption in favour of access; good procedural means by which the right may 
be exercised, including through proactive publication obligations; a clear and narrow regime of 
exceptions; and the right to appeal breaches of the rules to independent oversight bodies.250 
In addition, there are access to information laws in more than 135 countries around the world that allow 
access by the general public to data held by national governments,251  or, if applicable, by state and local 
governments. It is vital that LEAs understand that journalists and members of the public have a legal 
right to request information from their organisations.
Under access to information laws, governments and public bodies (such as LEAs) are typically bound 
by a duty to publish and promote openness of information about public institutions, activity and policies. 
In many countries there are also constitutional guarantees for the right of access to information. 
However, there are exceptions according to international standards as to what should be released 
under these acts of legislation, and so officers should seek advice on this from public relations or 
communications colleagues.
247  Joint declaration by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media and the OAS Special 
Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression. 2004. International Mechanisms for Promoting Freedom of Expression  
https:/ /www.osce.org/files/f/documents/6/f/38632.pdf , p.2
248  See the SDG Indicators Metadata Repository from the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs: https:/ /unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/
249  Ibid
250  UNESCO. 2008. Freedom of information: a comparative legal survey. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000158450 , p.155
251  For a full list of countries that have adopted access to information laws, see https://www.rti-rating.org/
184 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsPolice misconduct and accountability
Requests for information about misconduct or wrongdoing by police officers 
and law enforcement officials can be uncomfortable for LEAs and give rise to 
defensive behaviours and resistance to transparency. Such behaviours can easily 
lead to scrutiny in public courts and adverse publicity when attempts to resist A TI 
requests are made public.
In 2019, after refusing requests from the Chicago Reporter for more than fourteen 
months, the Chicago Police handed a over spreadsheet of more than 30 thousand 
current and former Chicago police officers dating back to the mid-1940s, including 
names, badge numbers, dates of service, last rank and assignment and other  
data points.252 
The Chicago Reporter had constructed a database of police misconduct lawsuits 
and using simple comparison, were able to link the database to the police personnel 
file. However, with incomplete police records and shortened names, the full extent 
to which police officers appeared as defendants in multiple cases was unclear. 
The Reporter took the view, ultimately agreed by the Courts, that an accurate list of 
officer details would allow them to use a simple algorithm to cross refence lawsuits 
and officers – an important window on police accountability. The Chicago Police 
Department resisted strongly but when forced by the court to hand over the list, 
the outcome of the investigation was revealing. For example, one officer appeared 
in 16 lawsuits that cost the city more than half a million US dollars. 
Discussion points
	` Does your state have an Access to public information (A TI) legislation ?
	` If so, are you familiar with it?
	` If your state does not have an A TI or similar legislation, should it?
252  Matt Kiefer, The Chicago Reporter, 28 August 2019. How the Chicago Police Department fought – and ultimately lost – its FOIA battle to keep cop names from the 
public. https:/ /www.chicagoreporter.com/how-the-chicago-police-department-fought-and-ultimately-lost-its-foia-battle-to-keep-cop-names-from-the-public/
| 185
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 77.2.2  The principle of maximum disclosure of information
There are real benefits to a proactive approach to the release of information from LEAs, in the right 
circumstances. It can:
	` demonstrate transparency in law enforcement;
	` help to detect crime;
	` help the public see justice being served (for example, following prosecutions);
	` offset misinformation or disinformation (for example on social media).
However, it is important the principle of maximum disclosure is not misinterpreted. What is meant 
by this, is that officers should strive to answer requests as fully as they can, whilst offering additional 
information – over and above that requested – only when there is a clear underlying policing purpose. 
Whilst it may not be seen as necessarily in the interest of LEAs to proactively highlight all information 
that may be of interest of the public (for example, where officers have acted wrongly, or in cases of 
corruption), the police are a public body and are therefore subject to the disclosure of information 
rules found in ‘right to information’ laws that exist in many countries across the world. Further, access 
to information is a human right as enshrined in Article 19 of the UDHR, and LEAs have an obligation 
to promote and protect this right.253  Under this legal framework, LEAs are obliged to disclose all 
information that is the subject of a request for information, subject only to certain exceptions, including 
to protect the ability of the police to investigate crimes (see also 7 .3.5 – Journalists’ access to private 
communications by LEA officers).
LEAs should not seek to constrain or frustrate the media and citizens, when they request information 
that they are legally entitled to have. Officers should release information as required by law and allow 
them to accurately report matters that are in the public interest. With regard to police relations with the 
media, all engagements should be legitimate and professional and underpinned by a formal media 
policy that can be accessed by both staff and journalists (see Module 3 – Communicating with the 
Media and Public).
A key question for LEAs working with the release of information to journalists is: If information cannot 
be released to the media, why not?
Discussion points
	` What do you think about the ‘maximum disclosure’ principle? 
	` What are the benefits of having such a principle?
	` What difficulties might such a principle cause officers in dealing with the media?
253  “Article 19: Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.” See UN. 1948. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).  
https:/ /www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights
186 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents7.2.3 Balancing ‘maximum disclosure’ and the need to 
maintain public order
There are two aspects to this. One is the extent to which the police seek to draw the attention of the 
public to a certain event or fact, by including it in their proactive communications with the media. Here, 
the police should exercise some discretion, as well as respect the limits of the law. The second is the 
extent to which the police should disclose information following a request either from the media or 
any other entity or individual. Here, the law as described above, imposes clear obligations on LEAs, as 
public bodies, which they are bound to respect. 
This is echoed by an extract from an article in a magazine for journalists:
The problem with ‘no comment’ is that it really is a comment 
– sometimes the worst comment one can make. It may imply 
guilt where there is none. It can sound blasé or incompetent.” 
“A narrative will take shape, with or without the newsmaker’s 
input, and by declining comment, the person at the centre of 
the story may miss the opportunity to influence how the story 
is framed.”  254 
In most democratic countries, the two main reasons for LEAs refusing to disclose information,  
are as follows. 
1. T o avoid compromising the integrity of LEAs or risk causing damage to an ongoing investigation 
or the administration of justice (prosecutions). This includes the disclosure of information that may 
harm the prevention of crime, as well as investigations, including investigative techniques, the 
apprehension and prosecution of offenders and, more generally, the fairness and effectiveness of 
the administration of justice.
2. A balance needs to be struck between respecting the right of the public to be informed about 
security matters, especially the criminal justice system, and the right of everyone to privacy. This is 
a complex matter, and slightly different approaches are taken in different jurisdictions. 
In deciding what to provide to the media, LEAs should always operate in an objective, impartial, fair 
and ethical manner. There should never be favouritism towards one media outlet or journalist, at the 
expense of another one. 
254  PRWeek. 9 June 2015. Why ‘no comment’ is no good https:/ /www.prweek.com/article/1350770/why-no-comment-no-good
| 187
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7Here is an example of some police guidance on media relations:
Police misconduct hearings are now heard in public and 
police communications should reflect such openness. It is 
important for public confidence in policing that the police 
service is open and transparent about actions and decisions 
relating to allegations of wrongdoing by its officers and staff, 
consistent with the Code of Ethics.
The police response to allegations of misconduct or crimes by 
officers and the related employment status of police officers 
are a matter of considerable and legitimate public interest. 
Media lines should be proactively released if officers are 
charged in relation to off-duty activities that involve serious 
criminality (e.g., sexual offences, serious assaults, fraud or 
corruption) or matters that could seriously damage public 
confidence in the police service or call its integrity into 
question.” 255 
255  College of Policing. 2017 . Engagement and communication: Media relations. https:/ /www.app.college.police.uk/app-content/engagement-and-communication/
media-relations/#publicising-internal-investigations-and-misconduct-matters
188 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents7.3 Access and Release of Information
7.3. 1 Ethical good practice principles for release of 
information
Based upon general practices of policing in democratic states and a review of operating procedures, 
the following practical principles regarding information release are generally accepted:
1. Being open and transparent with information in a timely way, is important for maintaining and 
enhancing a positive relationship between LEAs and communities. It helps to build trust in the 
official ‘voice’ of law enforcement officials. 
2. By responding promptly to requests for information, LEAs help to clarify their position and matters 
in which they are involved or in which they have an interest.
3. If information cannot be released to the public, why not? It is important to be clear on the justifiable 
reasons for not disclosing information.
4. LEAs and journalists are professionals in their own fields and a mutual professional respect for 
each other’s roles should be encouraged. 
5. Care should be taken by LEAs, that they do not share misinformation or disinformation with the 
media and the public (including on social media channels). 
6. As trusted public servants, LEAs should neither solicit nor accept the offer of any hospitality, gift or 
gratuity from journalists that could compromise their impartiality or integrity or the appearance of 
that impartiality or integrity.
7. LEAs should not abuse their positions as public servants, nor damage the reputation of their 
organisations, by using the media to further their own personal, political or professional purposes 
or business interests.
8. LEAs should treat information with respect, and access or disclose it only in the proper course of 
policing duties and with the correct authority to do so.
9. The decision to release information to journalists should be documented, along with the details of 
when and how it was released.
7.3.2 Who should release information to journalists?
 The most common response to this question is: senior figures such as the Minister of the Interior, the 
Director General of the Police or the Commissioner, and so on. However, this ignores the expectations 
of the public, especially the media, who may wish to obtain a fast-time “on the ground” operational 
perspective on a situation. Recognising this, and in a spirit of transparency, many police services have 
decentralised public relations functions and empowered operational officers to deal with the media in 
circumstances where time pressures or the operational context makes that necessary. 
Most codes of conduct and operational procedures for LEAs emphasise that officers should follow 
established procedures governing communications with the media. 
 
| 189
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7Whilst journalists may approach any officer to obtain information, in general, LEAs usually provide 
for the centralisation of such requests, or identify focal points under dedicated personnel to ensure 
consistency of response and better monitoring of media relations (see Module 3 – Communicating 
with the Media and Public).
Regardless of ‘who’ deals with the media, facilitating responsive communication for the overall public 
should be the main principle in all cases.
Discussion points
	` Who within your LEA is authorised to disclose information?
	` Are they always available to do so or is the disclosure system flexible enough?
7.3.3 How information should be released 
Regardless of whoever acts as the spokesperson for releasing information to journalists, the person 
who authorises the release must ensure a record is kept referencing, the source of the request; the 
source of the information released, the rationale for release, and details of and rationale for any aspects 
withheld. This ensures any questions about the factual accuracy of the information released can be 
traced back to the source for verification and gives an evidence-based audit trial. 
Keeping these records is critical because in many court cases, the timing and content of releases of 
information and the reasons for it, can become significant to the evidence in criminal trials. 
For the reasons set out above, information should not be released verbally in most circumstances, but 
should be in written statement format. Where written information is released, ideally it should be sent 
by email so there is an audit trail to refer back to if necessary.
Discussion points
	` Have you ever had to release information to the media?
	` Did you feel equipped to do so?
	` What tools could you use to ensure you are confident about what you are releasing  
to the media?
190 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsWhat sort of information should LEAs release?
LEAs should provide information that:
1.  is in the public interest (especially certain facts: public safety, accidents, crimes, 
thefts, arrests, indictments);
2. actively fosters public debate about issues relating to law enforcement agencies 
and their work;
3. the public has a right to know;
4. helps illustrates how law enforcement agencies conduct their work, noting that 
this applies to both positive measures but also openness about challenges faced 
by those organisations and wrongdoing by LEA officers;
5. helps build public confidence in the rule of law and law enforcement agencies;
6. helps in the detection of crime;
7. has a crime prevention or safety purpose (for example, during a major incident).
LEAs should not provide information where it concerns:
1.  details about an investigation where this information could compromise the 
investigation, the prosecution of the accused or future investigations;
2. details about certain situations, that might give others ‘copycat’ ideas in terms of 
the methods used;
3. the identity of complainants, witnesses and victims (except where the victim has 
died as a result of the incident).
7.3.4 Databases and electronically-held information
The last two decades have seen a significant expansion in the use of electronic media by LEAs around 
the world to store and sort data they own or have collected. In many countries, the vast majority 
of information held by LEAs is now in databases or electronic formats. Consequently, this form of 
information is a significant and obvious source of requests from journalists. 
LEAs use a range of databases covering subject areas such as crime and incident recording, criminal 
records, intelligence, and information on vehicles and premises. There are also specialist databases 
for operational areas in law enforcement, such as child abuse, domestic violence and investigation 
management. By its very nature, much of the information held in database/electronic format is 
sensitive, often relating to the details of criminal investigations and personal information about victims, 
witnesses and offenders. Consequently, LEAs should take great care when considering requests for 
disclosure of information from such sources.
| 191
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 77.3.5  Journalists’ access to private communications by LEA 
officers
Members of LEAs, like everyone, enjoy rights to freedom of expression and privacy and a level of 
protection in terms of the extent to which their private communications should be disclosed, either 
proactively or as a result of requests from the public. However, law enforcement personnel should 
not assume that their private communications will be automatically protected from release should a 
request for release be made. This is because as public officials, their actions, including their private 
actions and what they say and write, may affect the image and reputation of, and the way in which their 
organisations (LEAs), are seen. 
The status that members of LEAs enjoy can lead to the public giving enhanced weight to opinions that 
they say or write, and allegiances they may hold. The content of private communications may be made 
with the best of intentions however, LEAs should always consider the implications, should the material 
find its way into the public domain. In most countries, LEAs have policies in place to guide officers in 
considering ‘private’ communications, and also to cover situations in which officers are approached 
to write articles or blogs or do interviews that stray into personal opinion and could appear to be 
representing that of the organisation.
In this way, for those in the law enforcement sector, there are practical limits on their right to freedom of 
expression and privacy that go beyond those that are imposed on other individuals who hold no public 
roles in society.
The use of social media by LEA officers is covered in Module 3 – 3.5 Digital and social media.
7.3.6  The right to privacy from journalistic and 
other intrusion
Privacy is an important right, recognised in Article 12 of the UDHR and Article 17 of the ICCPR and, 
although LEAs enjoy the same right to privacy in their personal lives (subject to the foregoing section) 
as other members of the public, this right does not apply when on active duty in public places.256  This 
is due in part to practical considerations relating to the necessarily public nature of their positions and 
brings an added level of scrutiny from the media and public alike. 
Thus, a report on policing of the G20 summit held in T oronto in 2010, ‘Policing the Right to Protest: G20 
Systemic Review Report’, noted:
With almost every journalist, protestor, and observer holding 
a camera of some sort, their behaviour is liable to be recorded 
at all times. (Police) Most accept that, even under tremendous 
pressure, they may be held accountable for their actions.” 257 
256  As a recommended reading on privacy and data protection, see UNESCO. Guidelines for judicial actors on privacy and data protection  
https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381298?posInSet=1&queryId=148e8b4d-2572-4851-8d42-c34004c1dd8b
257  Office of the Independent Police Review Director (OIPRD). 2012. Policing the right to protest. G20 systemic review report  
https://www.oiprd.on.ca/wp-content/uploads/G20-Systemic-Review-2012_E.pdf
192 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsLimitations on the privacy of law enforcement personnel when acting in public and going about their 
normal role, are also justified by the need to maintain proper oversight of law enforcement, and the 
right of the public to be informed as to how officers are behaving. 
There will be occasions where legitimate security concerns require LEAs to take steps to guard their 
identity, perhaps when dealing with terrorist or high-profile matters. However, such considerations 
are clearly to be distinguished from simple personal privacy concerns. Protective behaviour of this 
type must be justified on a case-by-case basis and any precautions around identity should be applied 
only as far as is reasonably necessary to guard identity (providing officers with masks or removing 
identifiers from uniforms) rather than restricting the right of journalists and members of the public to 
observe and record events in public places. 
Here, LEAs must ensure that their officers understand the policies of their own organisation and have 
codes they can refer to. This set of written policies should describe:
	` Who is permitted to use text messages and social media.
	` What types of information can be sent using social media and text messages.
	` An overview of the organisational device ownership policy, including which carriers can be used.
	` Which channels and applications will be allowed for devices.
Before finalizing the policy, it is important agencies get feedback from key stakeholders, such as the 
human resources and legal counsel teams that might have a role in determining the dos and don’ts and 
in shaping the consequences of non-compliance. This step creates buy-in from the top to ensure that 
policies align with organisational needs and guidelines.258 
258  Cruz. R. 2020. The power and danger of social media for law enforcement  
https:/ /gcn.com/state-local/2020/07 /the-power-and-danger-of-social-media-for-law-enforcement/315140/
| 193
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 77.4  Withholding Information from the Media 
and the Public
No one has demonstrated that an ignorant society is a safe 
society.”
Lucy Dalglish, Dean of the Philip Merrill College of Journalism259 
There is an old adage that a picture is worth 1000 words. Nowhere is this truer than in media. The 
worldwide public has become accustomed to news that contains instant pictures, live audio recordings 
and video clips that give a sense of reality and vitality to journalists’ reports.
Previous sections of this chapter looked at obligations to release information to the public and 
journalists either proactively, for example to highlight good police work or assist an investigation, 
or reactively in response to a request for access to such information. The following section deals 
with circumstances in which LEAs may consider withholding information, and some of the special 
categories of information that may be considered particularly sensitive.
7.4. 1 Legitimate basis for withholding information 
Commonly, access to information laws that set out obligations to disclose information on the part of 
public bodies also include reference to the narrow circumstances under which information should 
be held back. It is important that police officers are aware of how the balance between release and 
withholding is to be struck, based on legislation in force in their own jurisdictions, and respecting 
international freedom of expression and access to information standards. In summary, the general 
circumstances under which LEAs should consider withholding information include information that
	` compromises an ongoing investigation, perhaps by alerting suspects to the likelihood of law 
enforcement interest in their activities;
	` compromises a future prosecution or fair trial;
	` endangers the life or well-being of a victim or witness to a criminal offence (this consideration is 
particularly pertinent in cases of abduction and kidnap);
	` leads to a loss of evidence that may be relevant to a criminal prosecution;
	` hinders recovery of property stolen in a criminal enterprise or cause the loss of property;
	` endangers public safety and order.
259  The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press. 2005. Homefront Confidential (6th Edition)  
https:/ /www.rcfp.org/wp-content/uploads/imported/HOMEFRONT .pdf , p.1
194 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThere are, of course, other situations that may give justification for withholding information from the 
public, and each must be judged on its merits. LEAs should seek advice and guidance on applying 
these points from specialist media relations advisors where they exist in their agencies. Advice given 
in the foregoing sections that decision-making around the release of information should be recorded 
applies equally to considerations around withholding information.
Discussion points
	` Has your LEA purposefully withheld material from the public?
	` If so, were the reasons for doing so justified?
7.4.2 Personal information and biometric data
Personal information is a particular category of data that LEAs should consider carefully before 
releasing to the media and the wider public. In general terms, personal information is defined as any 
information that can be used to identify, locate, or contact an individual, alone or when combined with 
other personal or identifying information. Personal information can therefore include the following:
	`  Name
	` Home or other physical address
	` Date of birth
	` Email address
	` T elephone number
	` National ID number 
	` Passport number
	` Driver’s licence number
	` Bank account number
	` Credit or debit card number
Many countries around the world have legislative frameworks that protect this type of information 
and place on public authorities, such as LEAs, significant responsibilities to protect the personal 
information of the general population. The categories of information given above are not an exhaustive 
list. For example, US federal and state privacy and data security laws define personal information in a 
variety of ways depending on the specific jurisdiction and law, and may be more narrowly defined. 
European Union data protection laws use the similar term ‘personal data’. Under the EU General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR), personal data is information relating to an identified or identifiable 
natural person (referred to as a data subject). An identifiable person is one who can be identified, 
directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier like a name, identification number, or 
location data, or to one or more factors specific to a person’s physical, physiological, mental, economic, 
cultural, or social identity.260 
260  See (EU) 2016/679, Art. 4(1) in EC. 2016. EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
| 195
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7According to the OSCE’s Guidebook on Democratic Policing:
Strict control by a data protection official is also necessary to 
ensure that the ‘collection, storage, and use of personal data 
by the police shall be carried out in accordance with 
international data protection principles and, in particular, be 
limited to the extent necessary for the performance of lawful, 
legitimate and specific purposes.” 261 
It follows that before considering release of information to the media and general public, LEAs should 
be aware of the local legislative framework that reflects those described above and understand how 
personal data or information may be defined. There is usually a presumption against disclosure of 
personal data and officers should remember that the restriction applies not only to single pieces 
of data, but also to release of several pieces of information together, each of which could not lead 
to identification or location of a person but could do when taken as a whole – a so-called ‘jigsaw 
identification‘.
Biometric data is a particular category of personal information and its use has grown over recent years 
because of the potential for biometrics to speed up identification and security systems:
Biometrics are part of the cutting edge of technology. Put 
simply, biometrics are any metrics related to human 
features. The most common examples of a biometric 
recognition system is the iPhone’s fingerprint and facial 
recognition technology. As an emerging technology, 
biometric systems can add great convenience by replacing 
passwords and helping law enforcement catch criminals. 
Biometric identifiers also act as access control in secure 
environments, both physical and digital.” 262 
Biometrics can be considered as physiological or behavioural characteristics and the essence is that 
they are entirely personal to an individual. Because of this, with the exception of basic descriptive data, 
such as height and hair colour, it is difficult to see how any individual entity or the media could have a 
legitimate interest in seeking disclosure of biometric information and LEAs should consult at a senior 
level before considering any such request. There should be a presumption against disclosure of this 
type of highly sensitive personal data unless there is a compelling reason to do otherwise.
261  OSCE. 2008. Guidebook on Democratic Policing. https:/ /www.osce.org/secretariat/23804 , p. 20
262  Norton. 2019. Biometrics and biometric data: What is it and is it secure? https:/ /us.norton.com/internetsecurity-iot-biometrics-how-do-they-work-are-they-safe.html
196 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents7.4.3 Surveillance material
It is undeniable that surveillance and the knowledge that one 
is under the threat of being spied on can affect the way an 
individual decides to exercise his or her rights. Such a scenario 
might result in self  censorship. This is of particular concern 
when it relates to the freedom of the press, which is an 
important pillar of democracy. Such chilling effect on the 
freedom of speech is an assault on the vital public  watchdog 
role of the press, which may undermine the ability of the press 
to provide accurate and reliable information.”
Writ Petition verdict, Manohar vs Union of India263 
Public bodies, including LEAs around the world, gather a good deal of information in the form of 
surveillance material, often held electronically. Surveillance material is traditionally considered to be 
in the form of photographs or video. When handling requests to disclose surveillance material, LEAs 
should also remember that this category of data can also be held in written format, such as notes 
describing a person’s movements, location or actions.
In the context of this manual, surveillance can be considered in two ways:
1. Video footage of events captured on public and private closed circuit television (CCTV) systems. 
2. Video, photographic and other documentary material gathered by LEA officers engaged in 
targeted surveillance operations against criminals.
In terms of CCTV material, this type of surveillance is a feature of modern life across the world, with 
town and city centres, high profile buildings and public spaces covered by overlapping surveillance 
systems. However, LEAs will seek access to CCTV footage because it shows, for example, criminal 
offences taking place, the potential identity of witnesses, or the movements of vulnerable people who 
have gone missing. 
It is common for media outlets to seek disclosure of CCTV footage where it is of relevance to a story 
that is in the public interest. All of the considerations previously described around considering release 
of information apply to this type of surveillance material. However, in making their decision, members of 
LEAs should remember that CCTV footage, by its nature, also captures images and information about 
members of the public with no connection to the incident that is of interest. In this way, CCTV intrudes 
upon the right to privacy of those caught up in the images through collateral intrusion and is therefore 
subject to any privacy laws that exist in the jurisdiction. It is important when considering release of 
CCTV footage that collateral intrusion and its impact is considered, and that officers attempt to guard 
the privacy of the general public or witnesses by perhaps pixelating faces, editing, changing the scale 
of the footage or blanking parts of the field of vision.
263  See para. 39 of the WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO. 314 OF 2021 in the Supreme Court of India Criminal/Civil Original Jurisdiction:  
https:/ /globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/pegasus-order-supreme-court-403008.pdf
| 197
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7The following points are extracts from the Right to Information and Privacy Guidelines of the Information 
Commissioner, in Queensland, Australia:264 
	` Documented policies and procedures which address the privacy considerations of using camera 
surveillance will help ensure compliance with the requirements of the IP (Information Privacy) Act, 
clarify responsibilities, and ensure consistency in decision making and operational practices. 
	` Personal information must be adequately protected against misuse, loss, and unauthorised 
access, use and disclosure. This means protecting both stored camera footage and areas where 
monitoring of camera surveillance takes place. Potential security measures include physical, 
technical and operational safeguards.
  Operational safeguards involve establishing documented policies and practices about access 
to footage such as: 
 –  limiting the number of staff who can access footage and/or control rooms to those who ‘need to 
know’ and having a standardised, auditable process for when access is granted
 –  maintaining an audit trail of who accesses footage and when it was accessed; and
 –  establishing clear protocols for responding to requests for access to, or copies of, footage (for 
example, who has authority to release footage and how copies of footage are to be transferred).
	` The IP Act contains exemptions from, and exceptions to, the rules for LEAs, or activities of 
agencies, that fall within these exceptions and exemptions may be entitled to disregard some of 
the privacy principles when conducting camera surveillance. Such exemptions may be with 
regards to controlled operations or activities and covert operations and investigations.
Guiding principles regarding camera surveillance
	`The use of a surveillance camera system must take into account its effect on 
individuals and their privacy, with regular reviews to ensure its use remains 
justified. 
	`There must be clear responsibility and accountability for all surveillance camera 
system activities including images and information collected, held and used. 
	`Access to retained images and information should be restricted and there must 
be clearly defined rules on who can gain access and for what purpose such 
access is granted; the disclosure of images and information should only take 
place when it is necessary for such a purpose or for law enforcement purposes. 
	`When the use of a surveillance camera system is in pursuit of a legitimate aim, 
and there is a pressing need for its use, it should then be used in the most 
effective way to support public safety and law enforcement with the aim of 
processing images and information of evidential value.265 
264  Office of the Information Commissioner, Queensland. 2019. Right to Information and Privacy Guidelines 2019  
https:/ /www.oic.qld.gov.au/ __data/assets/pdf_file/0010/28099/guideline-camera-surveillance-and-privacy.pdf
265  Surveillance Camera Commissioner. 2020. Facing the Camera: Good Practice and Guidance for the Police Use of Overt Surveillance Camera Systems Incorpo -
rating Facial Recognition T echnology. https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/940386/6.7024_
SCC_Facial_recognition_report_v3_WEB.pdf
198 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsA minimum standard for meeting the requirements of the law would include clear signage that LFR is 
in use and telling members of the public in advance about the use of LFR. For the public to be informed 
effectively, signage advertising the presence of LFR camera should be prominent. The signs should 
explain that: 
	` LFR cameras are in use
	` They process biometric data
	` The data is being used by the police for the stated purpose266 
In a factsheet from the OHCHR, it states:
Where personal information is collected, the data must be 
protected against unlawful or arbitrary access, disclosure or 
use. Although jurisprudence on this duty is scarce, the Human 
Rights Committee, in its general comment N° 16 (1988), has 
explained that States must take effective measures to ensure 
that information concerning a person’s private life does not 
reach the hands of persons who are not authorised by law to 
receive, process and use it, and is never used for purposes 
incompatible with the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights.”  267 
In relation to proactive or directed surveillance operations, there are legal frameworks in most 
democratic countries which set out the circumstances under which LEAs can target this activity 
against suspects. The material generated from these operations is particularly sensitive because it 
is often based on intelligence that has not been considered before a court, and it may give access to 
policing tactics and the identity of victims, witnesses and others who have cooperated with LEAs. In 
the case of this material, there is a strong presumption against release of information to the media and 
public, unless it follows a successful criminal prosecution, and the release is aimed at highlighting good 
investigative practice.
The increasing use of technology, including AI to gather and sift information and intelligence in 
criminal investigations brings with it a range of benefits for investigators, victims and society in general. 
Investigations supported by technological tools and AI can seek intelligence from a wider range of 
sources, sort and present data in ways that allow investigators to progress their work much more 
quickly. For example, FRT now means that those who present a risk can be identified in crowds, with 
significant benefit for public security at large events and around transport hubs.
266  See ICO. 2019. ICO investigation into how the police use FRT in public places  
https:/ /ico.org.uk/media/about-the-ico/documents/2616185/live-frt-law-enforcement-report-20191031.pdf , pp. 25-26
267  OCHCR. Factsheet No. 32, Human Rights, Terrorism and Counter Terrorism  
https:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/publications/fact-sheets/fact-sheet-no-32-terrorism-and-counter-terrorism
| 199
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7AI can even help LEAs to police the spread of ‘fake news’ and manage disinformation. In India in 
2013, the Social Media Lab (SML) of the Mumbai Police developed the Country’s first Social Media 
Lab “to monitor the happenings on Facebook, T witter and You T ube.”268  The social monitoring app 
was developed by SocialAppsHQ.com which “tracks and provides sentiment analysis, identifies 
behavioural patterns, influencers and advocates, track increase in chatter and generate alerts in real-
time on social media platforms.” Using the app, Mumbai Police have been able to take down more than 
600 “misleading” posts related to the coronavirus pandemic from social media platforms. 
However, whilst there are examples of real benefits of new technology, there are also serious 
implications in terms of privacy and the right to freedom of expression. These must be carefully 
considered, particularly where there are ‘grey’ boundaries between what might be termed ‘legitimate 
monitoring’ versus ‘unnecessary intrusion’. Increased reliance on AI and technology by LEAs and 
judicial systems can lead to disproportionate targeting of certain elements of the community with 
potentially unfair outcomes.
Case Study – South Korean National Police
	` In 2020, South Korea’s National Police published a human rights code of conduct for 
members of the Force. Article 7 of the code relates to Protection of Personal Information and 
Privacy and states: ‘Police officers shall protect personal information and confidentiality 
acquired in the course of performing their duties, and take care not to damage their 
reputation and credibility.’
	` Article 10 of the code refers to Education on Human Rights: ‘Police officers must complete 
human rights education so that they can cultivate human rights awareness and engage in 
human rights-friendly police activities, and the head of a police station must regularly provide 
human rights education to their employees’.269 
In many parts of the world, LEAs have sought to rebalance the potential issues that arise from the 
increased use of technology, by issuing guidance and developing policy to help officers and staff. 
In 2021 INTERPOL, along with the World Economic Forum (WEF), the United Nations Interregional 
Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI) and Netherlands Police, co-designed a policy 
framework entitled A Policy Framework for Responsible Limits on Facial Recognition Use Case: Law 
Enforcement Investigations.270  The aim is to promote the responsible and transparent use of FRT in 
law enforcement investigations and the white paper presents a common set of proposed principles 
for the use of facial recognition by law enforcement investigations along with a self-assessment 
questionnaire developed to support law enforcement agencies in complying with these principles.
Discussion point
	` Are the public made aware of any mass surveillance that the LEA carries out?
	` If so, how is that done?
268  The Hindustan Times. 2020. Mumbai Police remove over 600 misleading social media posts on Covid-19, share tips to spot fake news. https://www.hindustan -
times.com/mumbai-news/mumbai-police-remove-over-600-misleading-social-media-posts-on-covid-19-share-tips-to-spot-fake-news/story-kxU4y -
CbSzntwj8C1uFV7GK.html
269  Hankyoreh. 2020. S. Korea’s national police publishes human rights code for officers on 33rd anniversary of June Democracy Movement  
http:/ /english.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e_national/948933.html
270  World Economic Forum. 2021. A Policy Framework for Responsible Limits on Facial Recognition 2021  
https:/ /www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF _A_Policy_Framework_for_Responsible_Limits_on_Facial_Recognition_2021.pdf
200 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents7.4.4 Crime scenes
Crime scenes are a rich source of evidence for investigators and consequently a source of interest 
for the media and journalists. Crime scenes produce material in a significant number of forms 
including video footage, photographs, documents and forensic samples. For journalists, crime scenes 
represent the closest to the actual commission of an offence that they can get, and this underpins the 
level of interest such scenes attract. Access to such scenes is covered in Module 6 – 6.5.1 Access to 
crime scenes.
The considerations set out earlier in terms of release of information to the media and public apply 
equally to crime scenes as they do to other forms of information. Timely and careful release of 
information or material from a crime scene in order to help journalists report the story may help an 
inquiry to progress more quickly, help to identify suspects, or produce witnesses that otherwise would 
have gone undiscovered. 
However, investigators should always consider crime scene data particularly sensitive because of the 
risk of compromising future criminal trials by allowing physical access to a scene, the evidence therein, 
and potential contamination of that evidence. 
Any release of information about a crime scene should be considered by senior investigators and 
the reasons documented in an investigation decision log, or policy book. Investigators should give 
consideration to how, in the case of crime scenes, access could be given to the information in a secure 
and sanitised manner. 
Many LEAs across the world now take their own photographs or video of scenes and distribute them 
to journalists, where access cannot be granted. Thus, they facilitate the access, whilst reducing the 
risk of a problem. Similarly, the use of agreed ‘vantage’ points for the media or media perimeters can be 
helpful in finding a solution that works for LEAs, investigators and the media. 
As with many forms of data, here a presumption in favour of release is stronger once the subsequent 
criminal trial has concluded. Once that has happened, more information can be released and used 
by journalists to inform the public about the crime and the subsequent delivery of justice without 
jeopardising proceedings.
Discussion points
	` What reason might there be to restrict access to a crime scene?
	` If you cannot allow the media access to a scene, in what ways could you facilitate them having 
access to information from that scene?
	` What are the benefits to law enforcement agencies in facilitating access to crime scene 
information for journalists?
 
| 201
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 77.4.5 Seizures of journalistic material
LEAs should recognise that searching for, and seizing, property and information under any 
circumstances, is in itself an invasion of privacy in relation to the target of the search activity. According 
to the OSCE’s Guidebook on Democratic Policing:
In the course of investigations, police may only interfere with 
an individual’s right to privacy (including private life, family 
life, home and correspondence) when strictly and legally 
necessary and only to achieve a legitimate objective. 
Information and documents acquired by the police must be 
treated appropriately and with all necessary 
confidentiality.”  271  
 
It follows that there should be a strong presumption against release of information obtained during 
search and seizure operations – this is to minimise the impact on the right to a private life.
Another important consideration in cases involving the search of journalistic material is that 
such material may contain information that would expose confidential sources of information or 
‘whistleblowers’ (see 6.3.1 – Protecting sources and whistleblowers). In these situations, even more 
restrictive rules govern confiscations, which require the existence of serious and compelling reasons 
to do so. 
Seizing journalistic material is a significant step that usually requires some form of court warrant 
in advance. 
For example, Article 488.01 of the Canadian Criminal Code, says that LEAs must obtain a search 
warrant in advance of attempting to seize journalistic material. Judicial authorisation is, in practice, 
given by a justice of the peace only if the LEA demonstrates that they have tried to obtain the 
evidence in question by other means at their disposal, without success. Authorisation is given as 
a last resort and can be challenged in court by the relevant media outlet. When this happens, the 
seized equipment is sealed and cannot be used by the police until a judge of the court hearing the 
dispute rules on the matter.272 
Article 56-2 of the French Code of Criminal Procedure provides that only a judge (magistrate) 
may authorise the seizure of journalistic material, and the search must be done in the presence of a 
representative of the media. The media may oppose the seizure of certain documents, for purposes 
of protecting their sources, as a result of which the documents are placed under seal. Note that these 
rules apply to both the home and the working vehicle of a journalist.273 
271  OSCE. 2008. Guidebook on Democratic Policing. https:/ /www.osce.org/secretariat/23804 , p. 19
272  See the Government of Canada’s Justice Laws Website: https:/ /laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/C-46/page-118.html#docCont
273  See the online legislation database of OSCE/ODIHR: https:/ /legislationline.org/france#section-3
202 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsCase Study – Norway
	` Norway’s Supreme Court ruled in 2015 that the importance of protecting journalists’ sources 
overrode the police’s right to seize material, even if it was important to a terrorist case.274 
	` Earlier that year Ulrik Imtiaz Rolfsen had been producing Recruiting For Jihad, a 
documentary about Norwegians who had become radicalised. The Norwegian Police 
Security Service (PST) raided his home and seized eight hours of material without a court 
warrant because it featured someone who had been charged with attempting to join the 
Islamic State in Syria.
	` Supported by the Association of Norwegian Editors, Rolfsen challenged the PST in court. 
While he lost in two lower courts, the Supreme Court found that the public interest in 
protection of sources for investigative journalism outweighed the importance of the 
recordings to this particular antiterrorism case.275 
Where data storage devices are seized from journalists, officers must make all reasonable efforts to 
guarantee their digital integrity to avoid any loss of information, and returned to their owners as soon as 
possible. The Commentary on the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials notes the need 
to safeguard seized information.276 
Discussion points
	` Does your State’s laws protect ‘journalistic material’ from seizure?
	` If not, should they?
274  Refworld.org. 2016. Freedom of the Press 2016 – Norway. https:/ /www.refworld.org/docid/57f361d83.html
275  T aken from Columbia Global Freedom of Expression website. For more information on this case see https:/ /globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/cases/
rolfsen-association-norwegian-editors-v-norwegian-prosecution-authority/
276  See OHCHR. 1979. Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials https:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/lawenforcementofficials.aspx
| 203
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 77.5 Activities
The following activities enable trainers to: 
	` Determine whether participants’ understanding of information disclosure has increased since the 
start of the module.
	` Assess whether participants can now make sound judgements regarding the balance between 
disclosing or withholding information.
	` Encourage participants to treat information carefully.
	` Assess whether the participants understand the ‘maximum disclosure’ principle. `
7.5. 1 Activity – Release of information
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions, with 
one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group presentations 
are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants on their 
conclusions.
1. Discuss the benefits of LEAs having a ‘maximum disclosure’ policy for releasing information to the 
public. 
2. Discuss the main risks of LEAs releasing information to journalists and the public. 
3. Most LEAs have media policies that set out the standards of behaviour expected and the rules on 
what can and cannot be released to journalists. Delegates should either seek out their own media 
policy, or source one from another similar law enforcement organisation. Ask them to: 
 a.  identify who is permitted to speak to journalists in an official capacity and what the general 
behaviours that are expected are.
 b. identify information that can be proactively released under the policy. 
204 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents7.5.2   Activity – Balancing access to information and rule of law
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions, with 
one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group presentations 
are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants on their 
conclusions.
1. a.  Delegates should imagine they are dealing with a murder investigation, with a scene that has 
attracted media interest and next of kin who have been approached by the media for 
interviews. Identify what measures can be put in place to balance the public’s right to access to 
information about the investigation, management and protection of legal proceedings, and 
care of the next of kin/witnesses.
 b.  Discuss under what circumstances LEAs might need to restrict information about the 
investigation to journalists, what information that might be and why. 
2. a.  Delegates should imagine they are dealing with a public order situation, in which journalists are 
present at the scene. Identify what measures can be put in place to balance the public’s right to 
access to information about the incidents, management and protection of future legal 
proceedings, and the safety of journalists present at the scene. 
 b.  Discuss under what circumstances LEAs might need to restrict access to and information 
about the incident to journalists and citizens, and why. 
7.5.3 Activity – Personal information
Small groups may conduct the activity. These groups may discuss the questions, with 
one group member presenting the results of their group. Once group presentations 
are completed, the trainer should chair a debate between participants on their 
conclusions.
Personal information is a particular category of data that members of LEAs should consider carefully 
before releasing to the media and the wider public. In general terms, personal information is defined as 
any information that can be used to identify, locate, or contact an individual, alone or when combined 
with other personal or identifying information.
	` Without referring to this manual, list as many elements of personal information as possible.
	` Cross-reference those items with any privacy laws issued by the state.
	` If there are missing items not included your list, why were they missed?
	` If there are extra items on your list, why do you think they should be included in the state’s privacy 
laws?
Trainer note:  A copy of the state’s privacy laws should be available, if possible.
| 205
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Module 7206 |
Module 7  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsT able of Contents
High-ranking LEAs Workshop
Day 1:  Introduction & fundamentals on Freedom of  
Expression and Safety of Journalists | 209
Day 2: Practical operational aspects & principles of communication | 210
Day 3:  Fostering professional relations with law enforcement  
agents and media | 211
High-ranking LEAs Workshop
Day 4: Practical activities – Police and Journalists | 212
T raining-of-trainers (T o T) Workshop
Day 4: Practical activities – Police and Journalists | 213
General Course in Freedom of Expression,  
Media & Safety of Journalists
Day 1:  General Course in Freedom of Expression,  
Media and Safety of Journalists | 214
Operational & T actical Leaders Course in Media,  
Information and Investigation
Day 1:  Operational & T actical Leaders Course in Media,  
Information & Investigation (Operations)  | 216
Day 2:  Operational & T actical Leaders Course in Media,  
Information & Investigation (Investigation & Information)  | 218Annex
Proposed course templates
| 207
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | AnnexThis manual contains case studies, suggested training activities and discussion points 
which may be used by trainers as building blocks for training but do not exclude the 
possibility of other learning interventions.
In support of this manual, the following courses are suggested, for the following actors:
	` High-ranking LEAs, trainers of police academies and journalists 
 – 3 or 4-day workshop programme 
	` T rainers of police academies 
 – 3-day programme for high-ranking LEAs
 – 1-day T raining-of-T rainers (T o T) workshop programme
	` All officers 
 – 1-day General Course
	` Mid-ranking officers 
 – 2-day Operational and T actical Leaders Course
These courses may be adapted and combined, as per the contextual needs, incorporating both 
theoretical and practical training elements. However, in all courses, it is strongly recommended 
to discuss the international legal standards on freedom of expression, access to information and 
safety of journalists, as well as the legitimate limits to the right to freedom of expression.
For new trainers or those with little previous experience in training, the United Nations Institute 
for T raining and Research (UNIT AR) have prepared very good materials for trainers to develop 
their basic skills. The Facilitation T oolbox,277  is highly recommended for all trainers of the modules 
contained in the manual.
277  See https:/ /www.flipsnack.com/unitarcatalogue/facilitation-toolbox-en-fr.html
208 |
Annex  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsHigh-ranking LEAs Workshop
3 days
Day 1: Introduction & fundamentals on Freedom of Expression 
and Safety of Journalists
Time 
(mins)Activities
30 Opening ceremony
` National authorities: High-level officers (e.g., Ministry of 
Interior, Head of Police Academy)
`  National union/association of journalists
` UNESCO representative 
` Expert security forcesParticipants (Suggested)
` 5-10 Police academy 
trainers 
` 10-15 High-ranking law 
enforcement agents 
(LEA)
` 8-10 journalists including 
representatives from 
national journalist 
training institute  
(1 day in common with 
LEA)
Expert trainer(s)90` Introduction of trainer and participants 
` Presentation of the curriculum
` Expectations of participants from the training
` International legal framework (ICCPR, UN Plan of Action  
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity) 
` Fostering freedom of expression to strengthen the rule of law 
and democracy
` International and regional standards on freedom of 
expression, freedom of press and safety of journalists
15 Coffee Break
75` Human Rights/ FOE situation – progress and challenges
` Media and national legal frameworkRepresentative of National 
Audio-Visual Regulatory 
authority/ Representative  
of Press Council
60 Lunch
60` Journalists and Police, a common goal but different paths 
(Group discussion/activity) 
` Importance of establishing professional relations between law 
enforcement agents and journalistsExpert trainer(s)
45` Why ensure the safety of journalists?
` Why care about the media? What is the role of journalists and 
media? What is the role of law enforcement agents?
` Qualities required for good communication and professional 
relations with media 
` The benefits of media partnership
` Challenges and strategies of communicationExpert trainer(s)
30 Coffee Break
60` Practical operational aspects: case study
` Ethical challenges
` Strategies during operations (meeting with the press before 
demonstrations and briefing of journalists during elections, 
perimeters for journalists and instructions to units)
` Protection of journalists during public order eventsExpert trainer(s)
30` Overview of the day
| 209
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | AnnexDay 2: Practical operational aspects & principles of 
communication
Time 
(mins)Activities
90` State of emergency & special situations such as health 
pandemic: Role of journalists as essential workers – allowing 
access to public information, authorization for the movement of 
journalists despite health restrictions, and other measures 
taken in periods of emergencyExpert trainer(s)
15 Coffee Break
105` Social media and 2.0 communication strategy (Strength, 
dangers, impact)
` How to train communicator? Sharing useful experience  
for the policeExpert trainer(s)
National expert from the 
journalist training institute
60 Lunch
90` Theory and practice of communication
` How to prepare your message?
` Press conferences
` Media scrum
` Internal audience
` Media training part: video feedback
` Training on interviews with media 
` Interviews with print & radio, internet media 
` Interviews with TVExpert trainer(s)
30 Coffee Break
60` Mock press conference with participants Expert trainer(s)
75` How to build a training module for police officers on Freedom 
of Expression and Safety of Journalists? (Key components. 
T arget groups (officers, agents, high ranking officer). Specific 
or embedded in the human rights training, Duration. Outline of 
a course. Evaluation).Expert trainer(s)
30` Preparation for the visit of journalists 
` Feedback & Overview of the dayExpert trainer(s)
210 |
Annex  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsDay 3: Fostering professional relations with law enforcement 
agents and media
Time 
(mins)Activities
90` Presentations of participants (police and journalists) 
` Open exchange discussion regarding good and bad 
experiences from both sidesDay in common for 
journalists and law 
enforcement agents
15 Coffee Break
75` Definition of international standards 
 – (Group discussion)
` Who is a journalist? International definition
Expert trainer(s)60` The protection of journalists
` Example of codes of conduct for law enforcement agents 
towards journalists 
` Specific risks for female journalists
` Accreditation « embedded » journalist 
60 Lunch
60` Joint training
` Future commitments for police and media
` Internal production and images provided to the media 
(advantages and limits)
` Organisation of journalists’ visit to police stations and courtesy 
visit of the police to the media. Expert trainer(s)
30 Coffee Break
60` Concrete recommendations to improve relations between 
police and journalists and media workers (Sound 
communication strategy with media, establishing mechanisms 
between police and journalists in emergency situations, 
creation of a code of conduct, training of journalists on security 
issues, establishment of a focal point on the safety of 
journalists at the ministry of interior, establishment of a 
dedicated unit to investigate crimes and attacks against 
journalists, establishment of regular courtesy meetings 
between police and journalists)Expert trainer(s)
30` Final feedback and evaluation by participants (if 3-day workshop)
30` Overview of the day & lessons learnt 
` Closing (in case of a 3-day workshop)
| 211
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | AnnexHigh-ranking LEAs Workshop
Optional Day 4
Day 4: Practical activities – Police and Journalists
Time 
(mins)Activities
75` Welcoming tea/coffee from the police to the journalists
` Brief introductions of people and program
` Setting up 2 groups (“Morning”, “Afternoon”)Day in common for 
journalists and law 
enforcement agents 
15 Coffee Break
60` Role play including:
 –  Briefing from the police spokesperson to the journalists. This 
group is in charge of public information for the exercise
 –  Action (Cadets from national training academy will ‘play’ the 
“anti-riot T eam”, others will ‘play’ an angry crowd)
 – Group of journalists covering the riot Expert trainer(s)
60` Debrief and feedback: Actors/Observers/trainers
60 Lunch
60` Same role play activity (see above) with a different scenario 
and composition of the groups is changedExpert trainer(s)
30 Coffee Break
75` Debrief and feedback: Actors/Observers/T rainers Expert trainer(s)
30` Overview of the day and lessons learnt 
` Final feedback and evaluation of the 4-day training by the participants
` Closing
212 |
Annex  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsTraining-of-trainers (T oT) Workshop
Combined with High-ranking LEAs 3-day Workshop
Day 4: Practical activities – Police and Journalists
Time 
(mins)Activities
90` How to build a training module for police officers on Freedom 
of Expression and the Safety of Journalists? 
 [Key components; T arget groups (officers, agents, high 
ranking officer); Specific or embedded in the human rights 
training; Duration; Outline of a course; Evaluation]Participants (Suggested)
5-10 Police academy 
trainers 
Expert trainer(s)
15 Coffee Break
60`  Group exercise – T raining session design
 –  If required, refer to UNITAR guidance, T oolkit modules  
and suggested course formats belowExpert trainer(s)
45` Interim presentation of the groups and feedback
60 Lunch
60`  Group exercise – T raining session design (continued)
 –  If required, refer to UNITAR guidance, T oolkit modules  
and suggested course formats belowExpert trainer(s)
30 Coffee Break
45` Final presentation of the groups and feedback
Expert trainer(s)45` Evaluation and feedback on the final draft of the training 
session(s)
30` Overview of the day & lessons learnt
` Closing
| 213
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | AnnexGeneral Course in Freedom of Expression,  
Media & Safety of Journalists
Day 1: General Course in Freedom of Expression, Media and 
Safety of Journalists
Time 
(mins)Activities
15 Briefing
` Introduction of trainer and participants 
` Presentation of the curriculum
` Expectations of participants from the trainingParticipants 
(Suggested)
` All LEA officers
` Recommended 
instructor to participant 
ratio: 1/15
LEA trainer(s)
45 Lecture and discussion
` Democratic freedoms 
` ICCPR
` International StandardsT oolkit sources
1.1.1  Democratic freedoms
1.2  Freedom of Expression:  
A Fundamental Right, everywhere
1.3 The Key Characteristics
LEA trainer(s)60 Lecture and discussion
` Democratic Policing
` Limitations
` 3-part test
` Civil and Criminal lawsT oolkit sources
1.4  The Law, its institutions and enforcement
1.5  Limitations and restrictions
1.6.1 Civil laws
1.6.2 Criminal Laws 
15 Coffee Break
30 Activity or Case Study   
(as required)
Mentored in groupsT oolkit sources
Activity 1.8.1 – Limits and Restrictions
Activity 1.8.2 – Doctrinal references 
Case Study – Germany, 2015
Case Study – Rwanda, 2012
Case Study – USA, 2017
Note: A local relevant case study is preferential
LEA trainer(s) 45 Lecture and discussion
` Current trends
 – Covid-19
 – Disinformation
 – Digital technologyT oolkit sources
1.7.1 The impact of Covid-19
1.7.2  Disinformation and ‘fake news’
1.7 .3  Digital technology
214 |
Annex  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents60 Lunch
60 Lecture and discussion
` Freedom of the media
` Journalism and journalists
` Threats
 – Physical
 – Online
 – WomenT oolkit sources
2.1.1 Freedom of the Media
2.2 Who is a Journalist?
2.2.1  A journalist’s needs
2.3  Why is the safety of journalists important?
2.3.1  The increasing risk
2.3.2 Online
2.3.3  T argeting of women
LEA trainer(s)45 Lecture and discussion
` Protection of journalists
 – State obligations
 –  UN Plan of Action on the 
Safety of Journalists and 
the Issue of Impunity
 – International examplesT oolkit sources
2.4.1  State obligations
2.4.2   Early Warning Mechanisms
2.4.3   Police Protection examples
15 Coffee Break
30 Activity or Case Study   
(as required)
Mentored in groupsT oolkit sources
Activity 2.5.1 – Online threats
Activity 2.5.2 – Safety of Journalists
Activity 2.5.3 – Role play: Journalists
Case Study – T argeting of female journalists 
Note: A local relevant case study is preferential
LEA trainer(s)
30` Overview of the day & lessons learnt
` Closing
| 215
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | AnnexOperational & T actical Leaders Course in Media, 
Information and Investigation
Day 1: Operational & T actical Leaders Course in Media, 
Information & Investigation (Operations)
Time 
(mins)Activities
15 Briefing
` Introduction of trainer and participants 
` Presentation of the curriculum
` Expectations of participants from the 
trainingParticipants (Suggested)
` All middle ranking LEA officers
` Recommended instructor to participant 
ratio: 1/15
LEA trainer(s)
45 Lecture and discussion
` Crisis communication
 – Phases
 – Crisis Cycle
 – Information requirementsT oolkit sources
4.2  Crisis Communications 
4.2.1 Crisis phases
4.2.2  Communicating in crisis
LEA trainer(s)45 Lecture and discussion
` Roles and Responsibilities
 – Command structure
 –  Communications requirementsT oolkit sources
4.3   Roles and Responsibilities 
15 Coffee Break
60 Lecture and discussion  
` Specific Incidents and 
Circumstances
 – T errorist attack
 –  Armed siege/hostage crisis
 – Natural disasters
 – Major incident or accident
 – Threat to public healthT oolkit sources
4.4   Specific Incidents and Circumstances
4.4.1  T errorist attack
4.4.2   Armed siege/hostage crisis
4.4.3   Natural disasters
4.4.4   Major incident or accident
4.4.5  Threat to public health
LEA trainer(s)45 Lecture and discussion
` Current trends
 – Covid-19
 – Disinformation
 – Digital technologyT oolkit sources
1.7.1 The impact of Covid-19
1.7.2  Disinformation and ‘fake news’
1.7 .3  Digital technology
216 |
Annex  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents60 Lunch
30 Activity or Case Study   
(as required)
Mentored in groupsT oolkit sources
Activity 4.5.1 – Roles and responsibilities
Activity 4.5.2 – Media during crisis
Case Study – Interplay between journalists 
and social media during a terrorist attack
Case Study – Police and Media Cooperation 
– Belgium 2015
Note: A local relevant case study is 
preferential
LEA trainer(s)
60 Lecture and discussion
` Political events
 – The Media’s role
 –  Security and safety of 
journalists
 –  Engagement with stakeholdersT oolkit sources
5.2.1  Working with the media  
Note: The video at  
https:/ /youtu.be/HaACXnfe T zY   
(used in Activity 5.3.1) may be of use.
5.2.2  Security and safety of journalists
5.2.3  Notification
5.2.4   Engagement with stakeholders
5.2.5   Monitoring of and reporting on protests
LEA trainer(s)45 Lecture and discussion
` Protection of journalists
 – State obligations
 –  UN Plan of Action on the Safety 
of Journalists and the Issue of 
Impunity
 – International examplesT oolkit sources
2.4.1  State obligations
2.4.2   Early Warning Mechanisms
2.4.3   Police Protection examples
45 Activity or Case Study   
(as required)
Mentored in groupsT oolkit sources
Activity 5.4.1 – The Rights of Journalists in a 
Protest
Activity 5.4.2 – Protecting Journalists during a 
Protest
Case Study – Brazil
Note: A local relevant case study is preferential
15 Coffee Break
45 Lecture and discussion
` Elections
 – Election cycle
 – EMBs
 – ConflictT oolkit sources
5.3  Elections
5.3.1  The Electoral Cycle
5.3.2   Collaborating with Electoral 
Management Bodies (EMBs)
5.3.3  Conflict during elections
LEA trainer(s)
30` Overview of the day & lessons learnt
| 217
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Annex 
Day 2: Operational & T actical Leaders Course in Media, 
Information & Investigation (Investigation & Information)
Time 
(mins)Activities
15 Recap
` Participants each recount one learning point from Day 1
LEA trainer(s)60 Lecture and discussion
` Crimes against journalists
 –  Prevent, Protect and Prosecute
 – Protecting sources
 – Protecting othersT oolkit sources
6.2.1  The duty to Prevent, Protect and 
Prosecute
6.3.1   Protecting sources and whistleblowers
6.3.2  Protecting victims, next-of-kin and 
witnesses
30 Activity
Mentored in groupsT oolkit sources
Activity 6.7.1 – Protecting journalists
Activity 6.7.2 – Investigating crimes against 
journalists
15 Coffee Break
60 Lecture and discussion  
` Investigations and prosecutions
 – Crimes against journalists
 – Good practice
 – Intelligence and evidenceT oolkit sources
6.4   Investigating crimes against journalists
6.4.1   Examples of Investigation Initiatives
6.5  Intelligence and evidence within the Law
6.6   Preventing prejudice of proceedings
LEA trainer(s)30 Activity or Case Study   
(as required)
Mentored in groupsT oolkit sources
Activity 6.7.1 – Protecting journalists
Activity 6.7.2 – Investigating crimes against 
journalists
Case Study – A family’s view of ‘good practice’ 
investigations of crimes against journalists 
Case Study – Mexico
Note: A local relevant case study is preferential
218 |
Annex  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents60 Lunch
45 Lecture and discussion
` International standards on public 
access to information
` Maximum disclosure 1
 – Principle
 – Balance
 – Good practiceT oolkit sources
7.2.1  Access to information under public 
access to information laws
7.2.2  The principle of maximum disclosure of 
information
7 .2.3   Balancing ‘maximum disclosure’ and the 
need to maintain order
7 .3.1   Ethical good practice principles for 
release of information
7 .3.2   Who should release information to 
journalists?
7 .3.3   How information should be released
LEA trainer(s)30 Activity or Case Study   
(as required)
Mentored in groupsT oolkit sources
Activity 7.5.1 – Release of information
Activity 7.5.2 – Balancing access to 
information and rule of law
Activity 7 .5.3 – Personal information
Case Study – Manchester
Case Study – Norway
Case Study – South Korean National Police
Note: A local relevant case study is preferential
30 Lecture and discussion  
` Maximum disclosure 2
 – FO I /AT I
 – Databases
 – LEA communicationsT oolkit sources
7 .3.4   Databases and electronically-held 
information
7.3.5  Journalists’ access to private 
communications by LEA officers
7.3.6  The right to privacy from journalistic  
and other intrusion
15 Coffee Break
45 Lecture and discussion  
` Withholding information
 – Personal information
 – Surveillance
 – Crime scenes
 – SeizuresT oolkit sources
7 .4.1   Legitimate basis for withholding 
information from the media and public
7 .4.2   Personal information and biometric data
7 .4.3   Surveillance material
7.4.4 Crime scenes
7 .4.5   Seizures of journalistic material
LEA trainer(s)
30` Overview of the course & lessons learnt
` Closing
| 219
Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement Agents | Annex220 |
Annex  | Global Toolkit for Law Enforcement AgentsThis T oolkit provides a comprehensive framework to strengthen the knowledge 
and capacities of law enforcement agents and trainers of police training academies, 
on freedom of expression, access to information and safety of journalists. It covers 
the international legal standards on freedom of expression as well as its legitimate 
restrictions, examples of standard operating procedures and good practices in 
improving professional relations between law enforcement officers and the media, 
and protecting the safety of journalists.
Notably, the T oolkit aims to enable law enforcement agencies around the world to 
update and reinforce, in a concrete and practical way, their training curricula on 
human rights issues, particularly freedom of expression and safety of journalists, to 
uphold the rule of law.
As the United Nations agency with a specific mandate to promote “the free flow of 
ideas by word and image”, UNESCO has been engaged in enhancing the capacities 
of law enforcement officers and security forces to promote and protect freedom of 
expression and its corollaries, press freedom and access to information. 
Through seven modules and proposed training courses, the T oolkit provides law 
enforcement officers with applicable tools to effectively communicate with the 
media and the public; enable a safe working environment for journalists, especially 
during elections and demonstrations; and investigate attacks and crimes against 
freedom of expression, both online and offline. It further addresses the growing 
challenges faced by law enforcement agencies in ensuring respect for fundamental 
rights, including the right to privacy, with the advancement of the Internet, social 
media and new technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, facial recognition and 
surveillance technologies.