 -1- 
  IFAP -2022/Bureau.3 3/7 
30 June 202 2 
Original: English  
 
        
 
 
 
 
Thirty-third (33rd) Meeting  
 
Bureau of the Intergovernmental Council  
for the Information for All Program me (IFAP ) 
 
23-24 May 2022  
 
Held virtually via Zoom on 23 and 24 May  2022,  
 9:30 a.m. 12:30 p.m. –3 p.m. – 5 p.m. in Paris / CET  
 
 
 
 
Draft Report  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 -2- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
 
1. The 3 3rd meeting of the Bureau of the Intergovernmental Council for the Information for All 
Programme (IFAP) was held virtually over Zoom  platform  on Monday 23 May and Tuesday 
24 May 2022  from 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., and 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. CET .  
 
AGENDA  and TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
2. The following was the Bureau meeting’s agenda  matched with page numbers of where 
each agenda item is covered in this Report : 
 
Agenda  Subject  Page # 
   
Item 1  Opening  3 
   
Item 2 Adoption of the Agenda  4 
   
Item 3 Adoption of the minutes of the 3 2nd meeting of the Bureau  5 
   
Item 4 Review of the implementation of the recommendations of the 
11th IFAP Council and the 32nd IFAP Bureau  
 
Annex:  
IFLA / UNESCO Public Library Manifesto – renewing the 1994 
common commitment between UNESCO and The International 
Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA)  5 
   
Item 5 Financial situation of IFAP and Fund -raising   4 
   
Item 6 IFAP activities planned for 2022 -2023  (Harmonization issues)  7 
   
Item 7  Consultation process: IFAP Strategic Plan (2022 -2025)   10 
   
Item 8 Visibility of IFAP  10 
   
Item 9 Miscellaneous  12 
   
Item 1 0 Closure  12 
   
Annex  1 Decisions  13 
   
Annex 2 The endorsement  of the IFLA -UNESCO  Public Library 
Manifesto 2 022  16 
 
 
  -3- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
 
ATTENDANCE  
 
3. A total of 30 participants, including observers from IFAP Intergovernmental Council 
Members as well as other UNESCO Member States, registered for the meeting (see List 
of participants of the Meeting in Annex I  (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.3 3/Inf.3).   
 
4. The following Members of the Bureau of the Intergovernmental Council for the Information 
for All Programme (IFAP) were present at the meeting :  
Role  Representative  Member State  
Chair  Dorothy Gordon  Ghana  
Vice-Chairs  Yves Poul let Belgium  
Cordel Green  Jamaica  
Evegeny Kuzmin  Russian Federation  
Salih Abdullah  Libya  
Rapporteur  Soumya Chandrashekhrachari  India  
 
Due to personal commitments, the Vice Chair, Cordel Green has been absent the second 
day of the meeting, on 24th May, and Yves Poullet was absent during the morning session 
on 24th May.  
 
5. The UNESCO Director -General  was represented by  Tawfik Jelassi , Assistant  Director -
General of UNESCO . 
 
6. Participants from the UNESCO Secretariat were: Marielza Oliveira, IFAP Secretary and 
Director for Partnerships and Operational Programme Monitoring, Communication and 
Information Sector;  Xianhong Hu , Programme Specialist, Comm unication and Information 
Sector;  Marie -Christine Botte, Senior Programme Assistant, Communication and 
Information Sector; and Viktoriya Grudyuk , Intern , Communication and Information Sector.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM  1 
Opening  
 
7. The IFAP Chair  called to order the 3 3rd meeting of the Bureau of the Intergovernmental 
Council for the Information for All Programme (IFAP) welcom ing all participants and 
observers . 
 
8. Member of the  IFAP Secretary , Xianhong Hu,  proceeded with an explanation of the online 
meeting modalities and its structure , calling attention to all relevant documentation, 
available on the dedicated webpage ( https://en.unesco.org/programme/ifap/documents ). 
She reminde d that IFAP Bureau meetings are open to all UNESCO Member States, 
whether  or not they are members of the IFAP Council . She underlined that the meeting is 
conducted in English without any interpretation, as decided by the IFAP Bureau.  
  -4- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
Opening remarks by UNESCO Director -General Representative  
 
9. The Assistant  Director -General  for Communication and Information  of UNESCO , 
Tawfik Jelassi , underscored  the crucial role of IFAP in enabling access to reliable 
information for all. The Assistant Director -General brought to attention  an opportunity to 
strengthen the visibility and contribution of IFAP, as UNESCO is promoting open and 
universal access to information: the celeb ration of the 2022 International Day of Universal 
Access to Information on 28 September. He further underscored the role of IFAP to 
enhance its contribution to the promotion, protection, and revitalization of indigenous 
languages within the framework of th e International Decade of Indigenous Languages 
(2022 -2032).  
 
10. Tawfik Jelassi invited members of the IFAP Bureau  to scale up their support and continue 
their collaboration in motivating Governments and their partners to build inclusive 
knowledge societies a t local and national levels, with access to information for all.  
 
Opening remarks by the IFAP Chairperson  
 
11. The IFAP Chair  expressed her encouragement for the actions taken and outlined in 
Document 5 of the Bureau, (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/5 ), addres sing “Visibility of IFAP”, 
and underlined the importance of taking proactive actions to enhance IFAP’s visibility and 
resources mobilization. She further brought to attention recent achievements of the 
Programme, notably the Brainstorming session on UNESCO  Recommendation on the 
Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, organized by the Chair of the Information Ethics Working, 
and a resulting publication on the knowledge societies in Latin America during the COVID -
19 pandemic, presenting a valuable set of recommend ations to various stakeholders.  
 
12. In light of the newly defined organizational structure of the Communication and Information 
Sector, the IFAP Chair , Dorothy Gordon, raised the concern of this new structure which, 
according to her, has not proven to be positive for IFAP including its resources availability 
at the IFAP Secretariat.  
 
13. The Chair reiterated that the success of UNESCO’s Information for All Programme 
depends on the ongoing engagement of Member States and the joint ability of those 
involved to encourage Governments to build knowledge societies at local and national 
levels.  
 
AGENDA ITEM 2 
Adoption of the Agenda  
 
14. Considering  the availability  of two Vice -Chairs, Cordel Green and Yves Poullet, during the 
morning part of the session on May 24, the IFAP Chair raised a proposal  to amend  the 
Draft A genda, thus switching the order between the Item 6 “C onsultation Process: IFAP 
Strategic Plan(2022 -2025)” and the Item 7  “IFAP activities planned for 2022 -2023” . Since 
there were no objections from the Bureau  members , the IFAP Chair formally adopted an 
amended Provisional draft Agenda  (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/1 Rev.2 )  
 
  -5- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 3 
Adoption of the minutes  of the 32ND meeting of the Bureau  
 
15. The draft Report of the 3 2nd meeting of the IFAP Bureau, held on 15,16 and 28 June  
2021 , was electronically shared  with the IFAP Chair and  submitted to the IFAP Bureau 
members for consideration and adoption.  Upon finalization, it was posted on the 
documents page of the IFAP website (Ref.: IFAP -2021/Bureau.32/Report ). Since there 
were no objections from the Bureau members, the IFAP Chair formally adopted  the 
Report.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 4 
Review of the implementation of the recommendations of  
the 11th IFAP Council and the 32nd IFAP Bureau  
 
16. Referring to  the Bureau Document  Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/2 , titled “Review of the 
implementation of the recommendations of the 11th IFAP Council and the 32nd IFAP 
Bureau ”, the IFAP Chair , Dorothy Gordon, gave the floor to the IFAP Secretary,  Marielza 
Oliveira to introduce the elements presented in the document.  
 
17. Following the 32nd meeting of the Bureau of the Intergovernmental Council for IFAP, the 
IFAP Secretariat  presented recommendations that have been prepared implemented by 
the IFAP Secretariat, notably a template for reporting on Working Group activities, a draft 
Manual of Op erations for IFAP. The IFAP Secretary further underlined that all the projects 
approved during the 11th IFAP Council meeting have been contracted and being 
implemented. An extended consultation process of the Strategic Plan (2022 -2025) 
involving various st akeholders have been prepared by the IFAP Secretariat, including an 
initiation of IFAP database update process.  
 
18. The IFAP Chair  suggested both draft Working  Group reporting template  and the draft 
Manual of Operations  to be further discussed in the Item 7 “IFAP activities planned for 
2022 -2023 (Harmonization issues )”. 
 
19. The IFAP Secretary  drew attention that the IFLA -UNESCO Public Library Manifesto  has 
been finalized, following the incorporation of the comments and inputs provided by the 
IFAP Working G roup Chairs . She recognized Claire McGuire, Representative of IFLA to 
be present as an observer of this meeting.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5 
Financial situation of IFAP and Fundraising  
 
20. The Financial report  (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/Inf.4 ) submitted by the IFAP Secretariat 
to the IFAP Bureau presents an available fund of $52,807.50 USD  for projects’ funding  in 
the IFAP Special Account.   
 
 
  -6- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
21. The IFAP Secretar iat clarified  that the amount of $52,807.50  USD  in the IFAP Special 
Account  represents  an allocated budget to the programme for this bienniu m. She brought 
to attention that the available  funds in the regular programme budget shall be committed 
and disbursed by the end of the biennium  of 2022 -2023 .  
 
22. The IFAP Chair  called for IFAP Member States to raise for discussion the question of 
fundraising and funds that are needed to ensure the financial sustainability of the IFAP 
Programme. She further encouraged IFAP Member States to scale up their contributions 
to the Prog ramme, both financial and in -kind.  
 
23. The discussion over the project fundings reached a n agreement on the capping amount of 
10,000 US dollars to be allocated on a project. Furthermore, IFAP Bureau Members agreed 
to a 2 -month time period for the Member State s to develop and submit project proposals.  
 
24. Called upon to comment, t he Delegation  of Libya admitted the amount allocated to the 
project’s implementation being insufficient and suggested it to be raised.  
 
25. The IFAP Chair  echoed the point raised by the Delegation of Libya and called upon 
Member States to carefully examine each  project  and consider  providing extra -funding.  
 
26. Due to multiple budgetary queries raised by the IFAP Bureau members, the IFAP 
Secretariat  invited UNESCO Administrative Officer in the Communication and Information 
sector who intervened to clarify the state of IFAP bud getary funds in the special account in 
particularly from January to April 2022. UNESCO Administrative Officer reaffirmed the 
funds to be always available on the special account.  
 
27. The IFAP Chair , the  IFAP Bureau Members  appreciated the presence of the 
Administrative Officer and the clarifications brought to the budgetary queries.  
 
28. Following the discussions raised on the extra -budgetary fundings, the IFAP Chair  called 
upon IFAP Secretariat to regularly invite all Member States to the statutory meetings and 
to ensure availability of funds to cover all the administrative costs including the 
interpretation. Dorothy Gordon invited the IFAP Secretariat to prepare a document 
presenting detailed information on the cost of the me eting.  
 
29. The Delegation of Russian Federation  encouraged IFAP Secretariat  to continue actively 
support Member States with projects’ implementation  and put forward an idea  to seek  
alternative fundraising options to promote IFAP, citing their proactiveness in organizing two 
international IFAP related events aimed to enhance visibility and raise awareness of IFAP 
activities without the use of IFAP extrabudgetary funds.  
 
30. Recogniz ing that new partnerships play an important role in fundraising  and raising visibility 
of the Programme . These include partnerships with institutions such as IFLA for awareness 
raising through its network with a focus on synergies in its partnership as well as potential 
private sector partnerships. The IFAP Bureau encouraged IFAP Secretariat to identify n ew 
partnerships with the private sector  with a prior clarification by  UNESCO HQ.    
 
 
 
  -7- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
31. The question of raising awareness and showcasing IFAP’s activity has been multiply raised 
by the IFAP Bureau members urging  to encourage national authorities participate in IFAP’s 
projects. The IFAP Bureau members agreed on actions to be taken to raise awareness on 
IFAP’s work both at national and international levels. The Delegation  of Russian Federation 
pointed out the need  to conduct  general advocacy network.  The Delegation of Libya 
echoed the point raised by IFAP Bureau members, underlining the  need  to illustrate the 
relevance of IFAP’s projects at the national level.   
 
32. The IFAP Bureau  recognised the importance of national level outreach and information 
sharing activities in raising the profile and visibility of IFAP . 
 
33. Called upon to comment by the IFAP Chair , the IFAP Secretary  underlined  proactive steps  
to be  taken by the Secretariat in the Document “Visibility to IFAP” aiming to attract 
partnerships and  funds to IFAP , notably  via the “ Strategic Financial Dialogue”, aimed to 
reunite different stakeholders including international organizations, NGO’s, private sector 
to present their different initiatives.  
 
34. The IFAP Bureau  supported the ideas presented by IFAP Secretariat , including to 
enhance fund raising, noting  its primary focus to be placed at national level with cost-
sharing and local fundraising for IFAP activities.   
 
35. The IFAP Chair , encouraged IFAP Secretariat to prepare a document setting out the 
alignment between the IFAP mandat e and the interests of 10 key donors ; a draft letter for 
review and signature by the IFAP Chair to all member states encouraging them to donate 
to IFAP and listing a certain number of strategic areas  and to provide Member States with 
the template to help t hem report in -kind contributions.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 6 
IFAP activities planned for 2022 -2023  (Harmonization issues)  
 
36. Referring to the  Item 7 (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/4 ) , the IFAP Chair  called upon 
Working Group Chairs to provide IFAP Secretariat, an updated list of Working Group 
Members including names, affiliations, contacts and, if one has been elected, the Working 
Group Rapporteur, in accordance with Article 4 - the Rules of Procedure and working 
groups of the IFAP Intergovernmental Council Statues . 
 
37. The IFAP Chair invited the Chairs of the five Working Groups to do a 10 -minute 
presentation on their activities and work. The following Chairs of IFAP Working Groups are:  
Working Group  Expert  Member State  
WG on Information Literacy  Dorothy Gordon  Ghana  
WG on Information Preservation  Laszlo Z. Karvalics  Hungary  
WG on Information for Development  Mano Verabathran  Malaysia  
WG on Information Ethics  Yves Poullet  Belgium  
WG on Information Accessibility  Cordel Green  Jamaica  
WG on Multilingualism  Evgeny Kuzmin  Russian Federation   -8- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
38. Due to the leave of Malaysia from the IFAP Council, the Working Group on Information for 
Development has not been represented at th is 33rd IFAP Bureau meeting.  
39. The Chair of the Information Literacy Working Group , Dorothy Gordon presented the 
outcomes of t he projects conducted by the ir Working Group and the number of activities 
planned for the upcoming year. Among these, the project organized with the Kingdom of 
Saudi -Arabia aim ing to present an outcome of the adopted IEEE standards, thus enabling 
Member St ates to draw conclusions on their policy implications . She shared with the IFAP 
Bureau members another activity planned  with her Working Group  in Canada in the area 
of media and information literacy. Dorothy Gordon  invited  all Member States and experts 
of the IFAP Bureau to participate in these knowledge -sharing meetings.  
40. The Chair of the Information Accessibility Working Group , Cordel Green informed the 
Bureau members on the completion of its report on the AI4IA conference  held in 2021, 
which represents  a comprehensive set of policy recommendations on Artificial Intelligence. 
He invited members of the Bureau, Member States and observers to attend its third 
conference on Artificial Intelligence for information accessibility taking place on September 
28, 2022. He also reported on the document prepared by the Working Group presenting a 
valuable set of best practices for Information Access and Sharing  including the 
dissemination of information during COVID -19 pandemic to improve  access to information 
and knowledge.  
41. The Chair of the Information Ethics Working Group , Yves Poullet, reported on the 
activities organized by Info -Ethics Working Group aiming to promote universal access  and 
multicultural diversity. He  underscored success fully organized, by his Working Group, 
online brainstorming session  aiming to foster the dissemination and implementation of the 
UNESCO Recommendation on the ethics of artificial intelligence. To strengthen  
cooperation between all IFAP Working Groups  and attract regional stakeholders , Yves 
Poullet  suggested  organizing  regional wo rkshops by local institutions in different 
languages.  
42. The IFAP Chair , brought to attention the existing issue related to the number of the Vice -
chair currently present, notably the vacant place for the Chair in Information for 
Development due to the leave of Malaysia from the IFAP Council.  
43. The Chair of the Information Preservation Working Group , Laszlo Karvalics, presented 
a project planned to be conducted with colleagues from Kenya on the audiovisual cultural 
heritage. He underlined active role of his Working Group in the preparatory process of  the 
upcoming conference to be held in October 2022 , a starting point of the project aiming to 
enable the establishment of a digital repositorium of the cultural heritages and sights in 
Kenya.  
44. The Chair of the M ultilingualism Working Group , Evgeny Kuzmin , informed on the 
conference organized by the Working Group in Moscow, July 2022 with a focus  on 
preservation and development of indigenous languages. The W orking Group has been 
working on the concept of the confe rence devoted to language preservation a nd 
multilingualism aiming  to enable formulation of relevant language policies, language 
diversity, preservation and revitalization of indigenous languages in the digital age. He 
further noted national initiatives of the Russian IFAP Committee to be  more prominently 
organized, comp rising events to promote multilingualism on the Russian territory.  
  -9- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
45. The IFAP Secretary  presented the IFAP Working Group reporting template in  Annex I  of 
the Bureau Document (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/4 ), prepared by the Secretariat, at 
the request of the IFAP Working Group Chairs to facilitate the reporting on activities and 
results by IFAP Working Groups  during the 32nd meeting of the IFAP Bureau.  meeting of 
the IFAP Bureau.  
46. The IFAP Chair commended the effort of IFAP Secretariat for providing the draft Working 
Group Reporting Template and encourage it to make further improvements.  
47. The IFAP Secretary  presented  the draft Manual of Operations for IFAP, Annex II  of the 
Bureau Document (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/2 ),  prepared following the discussions held 
during the 32nd meeting of  the IFAP Bureau . The draft Manual contain s a detailed two-year 
IFAP Project Cycle, an updated IFAP Project submission template, and guidelines 
prepared by the IFAP Secretariat aiming to simplify and facilitate the work of the Bureau 
and Working Group Chairs.  
48. The IFAP Chair  and the Bureau Members  commended the IFAP S ecretariat for excellent 
work in preparing the comprehensive draft Manual of Operations and requested IFAP 
Secretariat to make further improvements and requested it to provide a document for their 
inputs, so as to produce a final version in time for submis sion to the IFAP Council.  
49. The IFAP Secretary   also presented main activities  to be conducted by the IFAP 
Secretariat  (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/4 ) and invited Member States and stakeholders to 
provide their inputs and suggestions . 
 
50. The Chair of the Multilingualism Working Group commended the IFAP Secretariat for 
the work and actions outlined in the Document to support IFAP activities. He encouraged 
the IFAP Secretariat to continue actively engaging with activities and conferences 
organi zed by the Working Group.  
 
51. The Delegation of Libya cited an event to be organized aim ing to showcase how the 
protection of the manuscripts and their restoration process is being done. The Delegation 
of Libya invited  Member States and relevant stakeholders to participate in the international 
event organized by the Libyan Center for Archives an d Historical Studies on the Libyan 
oral narration.   
 
52. Called upon by the IFAP Chair to comment, the IFAP Secretary  reassured the Delegation 
of Libya to provide their support with organizing the conference and liaison with the 
department of Documentary heritage  in UNESCO.  Acknowledging the importance of 
partnerships, the IFAP Chair reiterated the commitment of IFAP to continuing historic 
partnership with IFLA.  
 
53. The IFAP Bureau Members expressed their mutual support to activities and conferences 
organized by the Working Groups.   
 
54. The IFAP Chair suggested the IFAP Secretariat prioritize its efforts toward resource 
mobilization.  
 
 
 
  -10- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
55. The IFAP Chair requested IFAP Secretariat to reinforce its work in the following areas:  
- Providing additional support to IFAP Working Groups;  
- Promoting those activities of the Working Groups which are communicated to the IFAP 
Secretariat with at least one-month  advance notice, through UNESCO platforms;  
- Facilitate linkages between the IFAP Bureau and IFAP Council with relevant 
Communications and Information Sections/Unit and UNESCO Sectors;  
- Identifying IFAP potential partnerships, informing IFAP Bureau and IFAP Council;  
 
AGENDA ITEM 7 
Consultation process: IFAP Strategic Plan 2022 -2025  
 
56. The IFAP Chair  called attention to the Document (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/3 ) providing 
IFAP Bureau with a consultative approach. The document is in tended to collect inputs to 
develop and finalize a concrete strategic plan for IFAP, including its submission and its 
adoption by the IFAP Council in November 2022.  The IFAP Chair  highlighted that the 
document proposes the involvement of a multistakeholder group in the consultation 
process on the  new IFAP Strategic Plan including UNESCO and its networks, the IFAP 
community, intergovernmental organizations, and civil society.  
 
57. The IFAP Bureau Members stressed the importance of the consultati on process involving 
various stakeholders and supported its emphasis in the document.  
 
58. The IFAP Secreta ry shared her views that  UNESCO’s actions in a broader digital 
environment  need to  have a focus on open data and  combating  disinformation . 
 
59. The Chair of the Information Ethics Working Group  suggested referencing UNESCO’s 
Recommendation on Ethics of Artificial Intelligence in the Strategic Plan.  
 
60. The Chair of the Multilingualism Working Group agreed to promote UNESCO’s 
Recommendation on Ethics of A rtificial Intelligence in the new Strategic Plan, suggesting 
it to be framed as an open -ended document.  
 
61. The Delegation of Ghana  proposed to include data protection by designing legal and 
policy -making frameworks with a primary focus on the developing countries and 
concretising the use of ICTs and transmitting technology into socio -economic solutions.  
 
62. The Delegation of India  sugg ested the Strategic Plan to be simple and targeted.  
 
63. The IFAP Chair  invited IFAP Working Group members to share contacts of the specialized 
institutions and companies, working at the cutting edge on the problems addressed by 
IFAP, to create a database of e xperts, and involve them in some of the IFAP meetings to 
formulate policy solutions.  
 
 
  -11- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
64. Members of the Bureau  raised for discussion major challenges to be potentially prioritized 
by IFAP, notably the existing gap between the governme nt and the private sector and 
brought to attention a set of issues raised around personal data protection and digital 
identities.  
 
65. The IFAP Chair requested  IFAP Secretariat to : 
- extend  the current IFAP Strategic Plan (2017 -2021) to the end of 2022, thus ensuring 
sufficient consultation time to finalize the next IFAP Strategic Plan;  
- schedule an informal meeting with the IFAP Bureau and IFAP Working Group Chairs 
to review the Strategic Pl an and its structure.  
66. The IFAP Chair  encouraged IFAP Secretariat to foster discussions with UNESCO house -
wide experts and Sectors  on the IFAP priority areas.  
 
AGENDA ITEM 8  
Visibility of IFAP  
 
67. The IFAP Chair  introduced Item 8  “Visibility of IFAP ” (Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/5 ), briefly 
presenting a set of actions taken by IFAP Secretariat to raise IFAP’s visibility, following t he 
outline of the plan of actions outlined in the Document “Visibility and Resource Mobilization 
Strategy for IFAP” (Ref.: IFAP -2021/Bureau.32/5 ), presented at the 32nd meeting of the 
IFAP Bureau.  
68. The IFAP Secretar y reiterated the importance to enhance IFAP visibility, by refreshing 
and updating IFAP communication materials on the UNESCO and other visibility platforms. 
She highlighted that such actions have been already initiated by the IFAP Secretariat , 
notably  newly designed  IFAP logo, contractors are being selected to produce both printed 
and online communication materials including GIFs, brochures, and videos .  
 
69. To continue promoting IFAP’s activities, IFAP Secretary  called upon the Working Group 
Chairs to regularly communicate on their events, conferences, and publications.  
 
70. The Delegation of the Russian Federation stressed the importance of broadcasting IFAP 
activities and communication materials within UNESCO plat forms, including the IFAP 
website.  
 
71. In response to IFAP Chair’s enquiry  to update and disseminate printed communication 
material such as IFAP brochures, the IFAP Secretar y reiterated its commitment to 
circulate the content proposal s within the IFAP Bureau and IFAP Council .  
 
72. The Delegation of India pointed out the outcome of the communication material s and 
proposed to apply a more simplistic approach by reducing its textual “heaviness ”. 
 
73. The Delegation of Ghana stressed the importance of identifying targeted audience, by  
understanding their profiles and urged to sensitise general public and reach out to the youth.  
 
74. The IFAP Chair invited the Bureau members to brainstorm on the new IFAP slogan to 
make it more appealing to the public audience.  
  -12- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
75. The Delegation  of Libya pointed out the territory dimensions to be taken into account to 
showcase Programme’s actions  at the national level, thus make it more understandable to 
the general public.   
 
76. Refereeing to the new slogan, t he Chair of the Multilingualism Working Group brought 
to attention its design complexity and sugges ted elaborating simplistic formulations to 
reach out to the general public . 
 
77. The IFAP Secretar y echoed the importance of identifying targeted audience, focusing on 
youth and experts in various IFAP priority areas, that can be reached following the 
elements  presented in the IFAP Visibility Document, including key central messages and 
visual elements.  
 
78. The Meeting took note of the Document ( Ref.: IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/5 ), Visibility of IFAP, 
and considered it to be a good information sharing document and suggest  IFAP Secr etariat 
to incorporate the following elements:  
- Segmentation of target audiences, so as to engage youth, academia, Member States 
and general public; and tailoring of visibility content to relevant media platforms;  
- Uphold IFAP’s commitment to multilingualism also in IFAP’s operations, ensuring that 
the new IFAP brochure and other communication materials are available in as many 
UN official languages as possible;  
- Propose metrics to track the results of the IFAP commun ication strategy . 
 
AGENDA ITEM 9  
Miscellaneous  
 
79. To respect various time zones of the Bureau Members, and considering the administrative 
constraints in the meeting’s arrangements, the IFAP Chair  requested the IFAP Secretariat 
to pay close attention to the schedule of virtual meetings, so as to accommodat e the time 
zones of IFAP Bureau members to the extent possible.  
 
80. The IFAP Bureau members recognized the new governance structure of IFAP most 
uncomfortable in terms of satisfying the needs of a knowledge -sharing organization. They 
have noted the other inte rgovernmental programs within CI sector has kept the same 
structure notably 6 vice -chairs and rapporteur and chair, therefore IFAP 33rd bureau 
meeting recommends the ADG/CI to explore how they can correct this, finding it difficult to 
operate with only 5 v ice-chairs.  
 
81. The IFAP Chair  requested IFAP Secretariat to ensure all Member States receive 
invitations to participate in IFAP Statutory meetings.  
 
 
  -13- 
 IFAP -2022/Bureau.33/7  
 
AGENDA ITEM 10  
Closure  
 
82. Concluding the 33rd IFAP Bureau meeting, the Chair again expressed appreciation to all 
Members and to the Secretariat and declared the meeting closed.  
 
 
 
Annex 1: Decisions  
 
The Decisions  made by the 33rd meeting of the IFAP Bureau are as follows:  
Financial situation of IFAP and Fundraising  
Action by Secretariat:  
1. Request the IFAP Secretariat to prepare a document setting out the alignment between 
IFAP mandate and interests of 10 key donors . 
2. Request the preparation of a draft letter for review and signature by the IFAP Chair to all 
Member States encouraging them to donate to IFAP and listing strategic areas linked to 
current context and working group priorities.  
3. Review the existing template  for Member States to report in -kind contributions and make it 
available to Member States.  
4. Prepare IFAP activity reports for key donors e.g. China so that they are aware of how their 
funding is being used.  
5. Encourage the IFAP Secretariat to continue the pre paration process of the Programme for 
fundraising and resource mobilization.  
6. Request the Secretariat to provide more information on the Structured Financing Dialogue 
and how IFAP can participate more effectively.  
Action by  Bureau and Secretariat:  
7. Encourage IFAP Member States to scale up their contributions to the Programme both 
financial and in -kind. 
8. Encourage greater national level outreach and information sharing activities in raising the 
profile and visibility of IFAP.  
9. Note the important role of  cost-sharing and local fundraising for IFAP activities at the 
country level.  
10. Recognize that new partnerships can play an important role in fundraising. These include 
partnerships with institutions such as IFLA for awareness raising through its network. 
Potential private sector partnerships will need to be reviewed with UNESCO.  
Working Group Reporting Template  
11. Commend the IFAP Secretariat for providing the draft Working Group Reporting Template 
and encourage the use of this template by the Secretariat, ev en as it works to improve it 
further. In the meantime, Working Group Chairs will not use the template.   -14- 
 Manual of Operations  
12. Commend the IFAP Secretariat for the important work so far done in preparing the 
comprehensive draft Manual of Operations (Chapter on Project Cycle, including a project 
submission template) and agree to open the document for two weeks for Bureau Members 
to provide comments, so as to produce a final draft version in time for submission to the 
IFAP Council. The manual should not tie IFAP to the cycles of any other programmes.  
IFAP activities planned for 2022 -2023  
13. Launch a call for IFAP project proposals by th e end of June 2022, giving two months for 
submission and limiting funds request to a maximum of USD 10,000, for projects to be 
completed and closed by the end of 2023.  
14. Recognize IFAP Secretariat’s work and suggest that it prioritizes efforts towards resour ce 
mobilization.  
15. Request IFAP Secretariat to reinforce its work in the following areas:  
- providing additional and equal support to all IFAP Working Groups;  
- promoting those activities of the Working Groups which are communicated to the IFAP 
Secretariat wit h at least one month advance notice, through UNESCO platforms;  
- improving visibility of IFAP within UNESCO;  
- facilitate linkages between the IFAP Bureau and IFAP Council with Communications 
and Information Sections/Unit and UNESCO Sectors;  
- identifying IFAP potential partnerships, informing IFAP Bureau and IFAP Council;  
Visibility of IFAP  
16. Commend the IFAP Secretariat for preparing the information -sharing document.  
17. Request the IFAP Secretariat to incorporate the following elements into the visibility 
approach:  
- ensure that the IFAP Chair and Bureau review all materials, print, audio, video, graphics 
etc. at a stage early enough in the process to ensure consistent mes saging;  
- segmentation of target audiences, so as to engage youth, academia, Member States 
and general public; and tailoring of visibility content to relevant media platforms;  
- uphold IFAP’s commitment to multilingualism in all IFAP’s operations, ensuring that the 
new IFAP brochure and other communication materials are available as many UN 
official languages as possible;  
- propose metrics to track the results and impacts of the IFAP communication strategy;  
Consultation process: IFAP Strategic Plan 20 22-2025   
18. Extend the current IFAP Strategic Plan (2017 -2021) to the end of 2022, thus ensuring 
sufficient consultation time to finalize the next IFAP Strategic Plan.  
19. Request IFAP Secretariat to schedule an informal meeting with the IFAP Bureau and IFAP 
Work ing Group Chairs to review the Strategic Plan and its structure.  
20. Encourage IFAP Secretariat to foster discussions with UNESCO house -wide experts and 
Sectors  on the IFAP priority areas.   -15- 
 Miscellaneous – Organization of IFAP meeting  
21. Request the IFAP Secretariat to ensure availability of funds for interpretation purposes 
during all IFAP Bureau and Council statutory meetings.  
22. Request IFAP Secretariat to pay close attention to the schedule of virtual meetings, so as 
to accommodate the time zones of IFAP Bureau members to the extent possible.  
23. Request the IFAP Secretariat to ensure all Member States receive invitations to participate 
in IFAP Statutory meetings.  
24.  
Annex 2: The endorsement  of the IFLA -UNESCO  Public Library Manifesto 2022  
Following the virtual consultation on the IFLA -UNESCO Public Library Manifesto 2022 
launched on Monday 18 July 2022 and completed on Tuesday 19 July 2022, the IFAP Bureau 
has voted with unanimity to endorse the IFLA -UNESCO Pu blic Library Manifesto 2022. The 
Manifesto and implementation activities will be submitted to the 12th Session of IFAP Council 
meeting for further consideration , in 21-22 June  2023.  
The text of the IFLA -UNESCO Public Library Manifesto 2022 is as follows.  
 
IFLA -UNESCO Public Library Manifesto 
2022  
 
Freedom, prosperity and the development of society and of individuals are fundamental human 
values. They will only be attained through the ability of well-informed citizens to exercise their 
democratic rights and to play an active role in society. Constructive participation and the 
development of democracy depend on satisfactory education as well as on free and unlimited 
access to knowledge, thought, cu lture and information.  
The public library, the local gateway to knowledge, provides a basic condition for lifelong 
learning, independent decision - making and cultural development of the individual and social 
groups. It underpins healthy knowledge societies  through providing access to and enabling the 
creation and sharing of knowledge of all sorts, including scientific and local knowledge without 
commercial, technological or legal barriers.  
In every nation, but especially in the developing world, libraries h elp ensure that the rights to 
education and participation in knowledge societies and in the cultural life of the community are 
accessible to as many people as possible.  
 -16- 
 This Manifesto proclaims UNESCO's belief in the public library as a living force for e ducation, 
culture, inclusion and information, as an essential agent for sustainable development, and for 
individual fulfilment  of peace and spiritual welfare through the minds of all individuals.  
UNESCO therefore encourages national and local governments t o support and actively 
engage in the development of public libraries.  
The Public Library  
The public library is the local centre of information, making all kinds of knowledge and 
information readily available to its users. It is an essential component of knowledge societies, 
continuously adapting to new means of communication to fulfil their ma ndate of providing 
universal access to and enabling meaningful use of information for all people. It provides 
publicly accessible space for the production of knowledge, sharing and exchange of 
information and culture, and promotion of civic engagement.  
Libraries are creators of community, proactively reaching out to new audiences and using 
effective listening to support the design of services that meet local needs and contribute to 
improving quality of life . The public has trust in their library, and in re turn, it is the ambition of 
the public library to proactively keep their community informed and aware.  
The services of the public library are provided on the basis of equality of access for all, 
regardless of age, ethnicity, gender, religion, nationality, language, social status, and any other 
characteristic. Specific services and materials must be provided for those users who cannot, 
for whatever reason, use the regular services and materials, for example linguistic minorities, 
people with disabilities, po or digital or computer skills, poor literacy abilities or people in 
hospital or prison.  
All age groups must find material relevant to their needs. Collections and services have to 
include all types of appropriate media and modern technologies as well as tr aditional materials. 
High quality, relevance to local needs and conditions, and reflective of the language and 
cultural diversity of the community are fundamental. Material must reflect current trends and 
the evolution of society, as well as the memory of human endeavour and imagination.  
Collections and services should not be subject to any form of ideological, political or religious 
censorship, nor commercial pressures.  
Missions of the Public Library  
The following key missions which relate to information, literacy, education, inclusivity, civic 
participation and culture should be at the core of public library services. Through these key 
missions, public libraries contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals and the 
construction of more equit able, humane, and sustainable societies.  
• Providing access to a broad range of information and ideas free from censorship, 
supporting formal and informal education at all levels as well as lifelong learning 
enabling the ongoing, voluntary and self -conducted  pursuit of knowledge for people at 
all stages of life ; 
• providing opportunities for personal creative development, and stimulating imagination, 
creativity, curiosity, and empathy   -17- 
 • creating and strengthening reading habits in children from birth to adulthood ;  
• initiating, supporting and participating in literacy activities and programmes to build 
reading and writing skills, and facilitating the development of media and information 
literacy and digital literacy skills for all people at all ages, in the spirit of equipping an 
informed, democratic society;  
• providing services to their communities both in -person and remotely through digital 
technologies allowing access to information, collections, and programmes whenever 
possible;  
• ensuring access for all people to all sorts of community information and opportunities 
for community organising, in recognition of the library’s role at the core of the social 
fabric;  
• providing their communities with access to scientific knowledge, such as research 
results and health infor mation that can impact the lives of their users, as well as 
enabling participation in scientific progress.  
• providing adequate information services to local enterprises, associations and interest 
groups;  
• preservation of, and access to, local and Indigenous  data, knowledge, and heritage 
(including oral tradition), providing an environment in which the local community can 
take an active role in identifying materials to be captured, preserved and shared, in 
accordance with the community's wishes.  
• fostering int er-cultural dialogue and favouring cultural diversity;  
• promoting preservation of and meaningful access to cultural expressions and heritage, 
appreciation of the arts, open access to scientific knowledge, research and innovations, 
as expressed in traditiona l media, as well as digitised and born -digital material;  
Funding, legislation and networks  
Access to the public library building and services shall in principle be free of charge. The public 
library is the responsibility of local and national authorities. It must be supported by specific 
and updated legislation aligned to international treaties and agreements.  It must be financed 
by national an d local governments. It has to be an essential component of any long -term 
strategy for culture, information provision, literacies and education.  
In the digital era, copyright and intellectual property legislation  must ensure public libraries the 
same capac ity to procure and give access to digital content on reasonable terms as is the case 
with physical resources.  
To ensure nationwide library coordination and cooperation, legislation and strategic plans must 
also define and promote a national library network  based on agreed standards of service.  
The public library network must be designed in relation to national, regional, research and 
special libraries as well as libraries in schools, colleges and universities.  
Operation and management  
A clear policy must be formulated, defining objectives, priorities and services in relation to the 
local community needs. The importance of local knowledge and community participation is 
valuable to this process, and local communities should be included in  decision -making.   -18- 
 The public library has to be organized effectively and professional standards of operation must 
be maintained.  
Services have to be physically or digitally accessible to all members of the community. This 
requires w ell situated and equipp ed library buildings, good reading and study facilities, as well 
as relevant technologies and sufficient opening hours convenient to the users. It equally implies 
outreach services for those unable to visit the library.  
The library services must be adapte d to the different needs of communities in rural and urban 
areas, as well as to the needs of marginalized groups, users with special needs, multilingual 
users, and Indigenous Peoples within the community.  
The librarian is an active intermediary between us ers and resources, both digital and 
traditional. Sufficient human and material resources, as well as professional and continuing 
education of the librarian, to meet the challenges for now and in the future , are indispensable 
to ensure adequate services. Co nsultation by leadership with library professionals as to the 
quantitative and qualitative definition of sufficient resources should be undertaken.   
Outreach and user education programmes have to be provided to help users benefit from all 
the resources.  
Ongoing research should focus on evaluating library impact and collecting data, in order to 
demonstrate  the societal benefit of libraries to policy makers. Statistical data should be 
collected long -term, as the benefits of libraries within society are ofte n seen in subsequent 
generations.  
Partnerships  
Establishing partnerships is essential for libraries to reach a broader and more diverse public. 
Cooperation with relevant partners - for example, user groups, schools, non -governmental 
organisations, library associations, businesses, and other professiona ls at local, regional, 
national as well as international level - has to be ensured.  
Implementing the Manifesto  
Decision makers at national and local levels and the library community at large, around the 
world, are hereby urged to implement the principles e xpressed in this Manifesto.  
 
Endorsed: 18 July 2022  
*** *** *** *** *** *** ***  