1
Mapping the Evolving Interface of
Access to
Information 
and Privacy
Issue Brief2Document code: C I/UAI/2022/56
Published  in 2022 by the United Nations Educational,  Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 S P, France © UNESCO 2021. 
This publication is available in Open Access under the AttributionShareAlike 3.0 IGO  
(CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license. By using the content of this publication, the users accept 
to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this 
publication  do not imply the expression  of any opinion whatsoever  on the part of 
UNESCO  concerning  the legal status of any country, territory, city, or area or of its 
authorities,  or concerning  the delimitation  of its frontiers or boundaries.  The ideas 
and opinions expressed  in this policy brief are those of the authors; they are not 
necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
About the Author: 
Dr Lida Ayoubi is a Senior Lecturer in Law at the Auckland University of Technology 
(AUT) Law School in New Zealand, specialising  in public international  law and 
human rights law, including the right to access to information  and its interface with 
other human rights. She has researched,  published,  and presented  extensively  on 
various human rights issues. She holds a PhD in Law from the Victoria University of 
Wellington  in New Zealand, an LLM in International  Human Rights Law from Lund 
University in Sweden where she was also a research intern at the Raoul Wallenberg 
Institute of Human Rights, and an LLB from the University of Tehran in Iran.
Design and layout: Trigeon
3
Access to information (ATI) is integral to the realisa -
tion of human rights. Much like other human rights, 
however, the right to access to information (RTI) is not 
without limits. Legal, justifiably necessary, and pro -
portionate limits can be imposed on the public’s right 
to access to information. One such limit is when there 
is a need to ensure the respect for and protection of 
the individual’s right to privacy. 
That the rights to information and to privacy intersect 
has become increasingly obvious and important, in no 
small part due to the growth of the Internet and digital 
technologies, particularly in relation to the collection 
and use of personal data. The evolving landscape of 
communication and access to information means that 
digital and online tools and platforms continue to fur -
ther dominate how information is created and shared. 
With that come challenges of protecting privacy while 
maximising access to information.
This policy brief examines the interface of the right to 
access to information with the right to privacy, including 
the right to the protection of personal data, with a focus 
on access to information and privacy legislation global -
ly. Other UNESCO publications, in particular targeting judicial actors, have previously examined the interface 
of access to information and privacy as it relates to the 
use of surveillance technologies for national security 
purposes, press freedom and privacy of individuals, 
the protection of journalists and their sources, access to 
public data, and cross-border data flow. 1
Both access to information and privacy are human 
rights that are essential to sustainable development 
and to the achievement of the Sustainable Develop -
ment Goals (SDGs), in particular the SDG 16 for the pro -
motion of just, peaceful and inclusive societies. How -
ever, the interests that each right protects may pull in 
different directions. This policy brief canvases the main 
themes at the intersection of the rights to information 
and privacy, while providing examples from legislative 
frameworks of the UN Member States. It concludes by 
identifying normative steps that Member States can 
take in better addressing the identified challenges. 
1. UNESCO, Guidelines for Judicial Actors on Privacy and Data Pro-
tection, (UNESCO, 2022); See also, UNESCO, Global Toolkit for Ju-
dicial Actors: International legal standards on freedom of expression, 
access to information and safety of journalists, (UNESCO, 2021). Introduction4
The ever-growing technological developments in the 
creation, storage and communication of information and 
data, especially online, have created novel challenges 
for the protection of the public’s access to information, 
the privacy of the individuals, and the balancing of the 
two. The increasing challenges to securing the freedom 
of the press and the provision of accurate and accessible 
information, particularly in the current complex 
landscape of the prevalence of disinformation and 
misinformation, amplified during and in the aftermath 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, add to the difficulty of 
protecting and balancing of the two rights. 
Access to information, as part of the right to freedom 
of expression,2 is the right to seek, receive and impart 
information including an individual’s own personal 
data. According to the Human Rights Committee in its 
General Comment No. 34, “such information includes 
records held by a public body, regardless of the form in 
which the information is stored, its source and the date 
of production.”3 All branches of the government, as well 
as other entities that perform public functions, have an 
obligation to facilitate access to information they hold.4
There is a strong connection between the right to 
access to information and the right to privacy,5 and 
since they both enable the realisation of other human 
rights, they should be considered as complementary 
2. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), Article 19; 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCRP), Article 19.
3. Human Rights Committee (HRC), General Comment No. 34 on 
Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression, UN Doc CCPR/C/
GC/34, 12 September 2011, at [18].
4. Ibid, at [7] and [18].
5. UDHR, art 12; ICCPR, art 17; International Convention on the 
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of 
Their Families 1990, art 14; Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(CRC), art 16; American Convention of Human Rights (ACHR), art 
11.2, European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), art 8; African 
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights; Arab Charter on Human 
Rights arts 16 and 8.1. Background 
    and context
rights.6 T h e  D e c l a r a t i o n  o f  P r i n c i p l e s  o n  F r e e d o m  
of Expression and Access to Information in Africa, 
adopted in 2019 by the African Commission on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights, states that “freedom of 
expression [that encompasses the Right To Information] 
and privacy are mutually reinforcing rights that are 
essential for human dignity and the overall promotion 
and protection of human and peoples’ rights”.7 
Notwithstanding both rights’ complementarity, each 
right has also been used to limit the enforcement of 
the other. Article 19 (3) of the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) stipulates that 
the right to information can be limited, only if provided 
by law and necessary for respect of the rights or 
reputations of others or for the protection of national 
security, public order, or of public health or morals.8 
Each of these terms are open for interpretation in the 
context of the national legislation of the respective 
Member State. Political systems could also determine 
the application of the exceptions. The Human Rights 
Committee has also recognised the need for such 
limits to be proportionate.9 While such restrictions in 
some cases may be legitimate, limiting the public’s 
right to access to information to protect the privacy of 
an individual is not without harm. 
On the other hand, access to information of public 
6. UNESCO, Guidelines for Judicial Actors on Privacy and Data 
Protection, (UNESCO, 2022), at 4.
7. Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression and Access 
to Information in Africa, adopted by the African Commission on 
Human and Peoples’ Rights at its 65th Ordinary Session held from 
21 October to 10 November 2019 in Banjul, The Gambia.
8. The test for the legitimacy of a limit on the rights in article 19 is 
sometimes referred to as a three-part test which requires that any 
restriction on freedom of expression should be provided for by law, 
pursue a legitimate aim, and be necessary for a legitimate purpose. 
See UNESCO, The Legitimate Limits to Freedom of Expression: the 
Three-Part Test, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wg8fVtHP -
Dag, accessed 2 August 2022.
9. HRC, General Comment No. 34, at [22].5by private sector, e.g. on social media platforms, is 
collected through “tacit agreements that users enter 
into, and a set of unspoken assumptions that govern 
who owns what is created and how it circulates”14. This 
lack of transparency would also impact individuals’ 
right to access to personal information due to the lack 
of transparency around whether a public or private 
entity is holding and using the personal data. 
Finally, another concern is the bulk collection of 
personal data by private sector entities, such as 
data brokers, from public records creating what 
commentators call a “digital biography” of an individual. 
This raises privacy concerns as well as access to the 
digital biography and therein contained personal data 
and information by the targeted individual15. 
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in 
its Sustainable Development Goal 16, aims to ensure 
public access to information as part of the realisation 
of the broader right to access to information. The SDG 
Indicator 16.10.2 is used for assessing progress on the 
reporting on statutory and/or policy guarantees for 
public access to information. One of the “Principles of 
Access to Information”16 which is of relevance to this 
policy brief is the principle of “limited exemptions” to 
the right to information. 
14. Jessica Reyman, “User Data on the Social Web: Authorship, 
Agency, and Appropriation” (2013) 75(5) College English, at 514.
15. Kirsten Martin and Helen Nissenbaum, “Privacy Interests in 
Public Records: An Empirical Investigation” (2017) 31 Harvard 
Journal of Law and Technology, at 120. 
16. SDG indicator metadata, 2021interest can be used to limit an individual’s right 
to privacy. Both these issues and their respective 
complexities are discussed in this policy brief. 
International standards advise that restrictions on 
rights should be the least intrusive possible, in other 
words respecting the essence of the affected right to 
the maximum degree.
The right to information and the right to privacy 
are increasingly interconnected in relation to the 
collection, storing, processing, and use of personal 
data. In principle, individuals should be able to 
ascertain whether, and how, any of their personal data 
is stored by public bodies in accordance with Article 17 
of the ICCPR,10 and to be able to access that data as 
part of their right to access to information.11 Treatment 
of personal data also creates privacy concerns which 
intertwines with the right to access to information. The 
rise of massive data operations in the private sector, 
including the commoditisation of data by specialised 
brokers and aggregators, is a recent factor. Some data 
brokers engage in the collection of personal information 
to be sold on to others for different purposes12. It raises 
questions of how the public’s right to information may 
apply to this sphere and/or how it may apply when 
Governments are purchasers of such services13.
Some of the privacy concerns regarding the use of big 
data that focuses on particular individuals or groups 
may be addressed through anonymizing the date. 
This does not, however, address access to personal 
information concerns as by doing so it may become 
difficult for individuals or even the data holder to access 
the personal data.
Another concern is the governments’ use of big data, 
especially that held by private sector, for intelligence 
and surveillance purposes which may not be the use 
individuals agreed to or are aware of. As Reyman 
explains, much of the commodified data collected 
10. HRC, General Comment No. 16 on Article 17: Right to Privacy, 
UN Doc HRI/GEN/1/Rev.9 (Vol.1) (1988), at [10]. 
11. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), Article 19; 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCRP), Article 19.
12. HRC, General Comment No. 34, at [18].
13. Ibid, at 2.6
2.1 Diverse definitions
Many of the concepts at the intersection of the right 
to information and the right to privacy do not have 
a universal definition. In their Access to Information 
and/or privacy laws, countries have adopted varying 
definitions of privacy,17 personal data, personal 
information, information authority, public authority, 
private body or entity, and confidential information, 
among others. Some laws may not provide a 
definition altogether.
The concept of privacy and its precise parameters 
are hard to define. The ambiguity in the concept of 
privacy has led to a myriad of definitions that are “so 
wide-ranging and diverse that they have significantly 
contributed to the […] common claim that the concept 
of privacy is incoherent.”18 Scholars have considered 
the different ways that countries have approached the 
definition of privacy and the merits and shortcomings 
of each of these approaches.19
International and regional human rights instruments 
do not define the concept of privacy itself but provide 
similar keywords when referring to privacy interests 
that have shaped the formation of an understanding of 
the concept. These keywords include one’s family,20 
17. Toby Mendel et al., “Global Survey on Internet Privacy and 
Freedom of Expression” (UNESCO Series on Internet Freedom, 
UNESCO, 2012) at [9].
18. Bert-Jaap Koops and Maša Galič, “Unity in Privacy Diversity: 
A Kaleidoscopic View of Privacy Definitions” (2021) 73(2) South 
Carolina Law Review, at 4.
19. See for a discussion of the different approaches to defining 
privacy: Adam Moore, “Toward Informational Privacy Rights” 
(2007) 44 San Diego Law Review, at 811-818; Daniel Solove, “A 
Taxonomy of Privacy” (2006) 154(3) University of Pennsylvania 
Law Review 477; James Whitman, “The Two Western Cultures of 
Privacy: Dignity Versus Liberty” (2004) 113 The Yale Law Journal 
1151;and, Bert-Jaap Koops et al., “A Typology of Privacy” (2017) 
38(2) University of Pennsylvania Journal of International Law 483.
20. UDHR, art 12; ICCPR, art 17; Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (CRC), art 16; ACHR, art 11.home,21 correspondence,22 honour and reputation,23 
dignity,24 and private and family life.25 
While the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights does not mention privacy or any of the 
abovementioned keywords, its Article 4 states that 
every human being is entitled to respect for “the 
integrity of his person”. The concept of integrity can 
arguably extend to include one’s privacy. 
When discussing the privacy exemptions to access 
to information, the 2020 Inter-American Model Law 
2.0 on Access to Public Information mentions the 
protection of “the right to privacy, including privacy 
related to life, health or safety, as well as the right to 
honor and to one’s image”.26 
The ’conceptual plasticity’ of the concepts of 
“privacy” and “private life” has meant that the 
judicial interpretation of these concepts is constantly 
evolving.27 In a recent judgment, the EU General Court 
considered whether the publication of a press release 
regarding the discovery of research funding fraud at a 
Greek university constituted a breach of privacy of the 
lead researcher with regard to the processing of their 
personal data, under the EU Regulation 2018/1725. 
The press release did not provide the name or other 
specific identifying information of the researcher 
but included the amount of funding, the number of 
researchers involved, and other additional information. 
21. Ibid; European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), art 8; 
American Convention on Human Rights (ACHR), art 11.
22. Ibid.
23. UDHR, art 12; ICCPR, art 17; CRC, art 16; ACHR, art 11.
24. ACHR, art 11
25. ECHR, art 8; ACHR, art 11.
26. Art 32(1)(a). The 2010 Model Inter-American Law on Access to 
Public Information in its art 41(a)(1) also mentions the protection of 
“right to privacy, including life, health, or safety”
27. Guidelines for Judicial Actors on Privacy and Data Protection, 
supra note 1, at 5.2. Challenges and themes at the 
interface of ATI and privacy7The Court held that personal data relates to “any 
information relating to an identified or identifiable person” 
which “directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to 
an identifier, such as a name, an identification number, 
location data, an online identifier, or to one or more 
specific elements specific to his physical, physiological, 
genetic, psychological, economic, cultural or social 
identity” would help identify an individual.28 
In this case, the Court concluded that the information in 
the press release did not constitute personal data and 
subsequently there was not a breach of privacy.29 
Lack of clear definitions in privacy and/or ATI laws means 
that the scope of the interests protected would be open 
to interpretation by information officers, commissioners, 
ministers, courts, or other stakeholders, creating 
fragmented and potentially conflicting approaches to 
access to information and privacy.
The relative incoherence of the definition of privacy 
and other related concepts also means that their 
definition may vary greatly from State to State. A clear 
example of this would be the difference in countries’ 
legislative approaches where the concepts of personal 
information or personal data are used. In New 
Zealand, for example, the Privacy Act 2020 refers to 
“personal information” and defines it as “information 
about an identifiable individual”30 while in Europe, the 
terminology used is “personal data”.31 
This and other discrepancies would create difficulties 
when implementing rules and regulations around 
access to information and privacy, particularly 
in relation to cross-border flow and protection of 
information, and can lead to unintended breaches of 
one or both rights. This may also lead to additional 
challenges for effective impact assessment, data 
collection, reporting, and review of appeal requests 
related to these rights.
28. OC v European Commission, Case T-384/20, Judgment of the 
General Court (Ninth Chamber) of 4 May 2022, at [44].
29. Ibid, at [91].
30. Privacy Act 2020, s 7.
31. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons 
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC 
(General Data Protection Regulation), OJ 2016 L 119/1, art 4.2.2. Safeguarding the right to 
access to personal data
Access to information is recognised by the Human 
Rights Council as crucial for the “promotion of 
personal autonomy”.32 The principle of habeas data 
is widely recognised as an essential part of the right 
to information.33 H a b e a s  D a t a  i s  a n  a c t i o n  t h a t  i s  
brought before the courts to allow the protection of the 
individual’s image, privacy, honour, self-determination 
of information and freedom of information of a person. 
In his 2021 Our Common Agenda report, the UN 
Secretary-General specifically highlighted the need 
for protection of personal data in the digital and online 
spheres. The report recommends the development of 
internationally shared principles to address complex 
digital issues including “providing people with options 
as to how their data is used”.34
The positive obligation on States to safeguard personal 
information and facilitate access for individuals to their 
own data is also a sign of “the move from a diminutive 
conceptualization of privacy as the right to be let alone 
to an expanded sphere of private life rooted in the 
realization of human dignity”.35 
The right to access to an individual’s own personal 
data has multiple components. First, every individual 
should “have the right to ascertain in an intelligible 
form, whether, and if so, what personal data is stored in 
automatic data files, and for what purposes”. Second, 
every individual should be able to find out which 
public authorities or private individuals or bodies own, 
control and/or access their personal data, or may do 
so. Finally, every individual should have the right to 
request the rectification or elimination of incorrect 
data or data “collected or processed contrary to the 
provisions of the law”.36
32. Human Rights Council, Report of the Office of the UN High 
Commissioner for Human Rights: Freedom of opinion and of 
expression, A/HRC/49/38, at [12].
33. See for example, HRC, General Comment No. 34, at [18]; The 
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and Office of the 
Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression, Standards for a 
Free, Open and Inclusive Internet (2017), at [178].
34. UN, Our Common Agenda - Report of the Secretary-General, 
2021, at 63.
35. UNESCO, Guidelines for Judicial Actors on Privacy and Data 
Protection, (UNESCO, 2022), at 14.
36. HRC, General Comment No. 16, at [10]..8States parties to the ICCPR are required to give effect 
to the right to access to information in their domestic 
laws, including access to personal data.37 Therefore, 
lack of specific provisions for access to personal 
data or for habeas data in Access to Information 
laws,38 or inclusion of brief or vague provisions,39 
creates a risk for the violation of the right to access to 
information. Furthermore, this would also impact the 
right to privacy if individuals were unable to ascertain 
whether their personal data is collected, held and 
used in a legitimate way. 
2.3. Misuse of privacy exemptions
As part of an individual’s right to privacy, States have 
an obligation to protect the personal data of individuals 
from unauthorised disclosure.40 To this end, countries 
may adopt the right to privacy as a ground for refusal 
to grant access to certain documents and information.
It is worth noting that the Human Rights Committee 
has recognised that any restriction on ATI must be 
included in “laws of parliamentary privilege and laws 
of contempt of court” and cannot be “enshrined in 
traditional, religious or other such customary law”.41 
A difficulty that arises at the interface of access to 
information and privacy, in relation to personal data 
specifically, is the issue of what has come to be known 
as the “right to be forgotten”. The right to be forgotten 
refers to the right to have private information about a 
person be removed from Internet searches. Although 
not a right recognised explicitly in an international or 
regional human rights instrument, the European Court 
of Human Rights has over the years developed and 
bolstered the right. In a recent decision in 2021, the 
Court ordered a newspaper to anonymise the identity of 
a rehabilitated offender, who was involved in a fatal car 
crash in 1994, in the archived version of the newspaper 
37. HRC, General Comment No. 34, at [8].
38. See for example Afghanistan Access to Information Law 2014; 
Bahamas Freedom of Information Act 2017; Bangladesh The Right 
to Information Act 2009; Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on access to 
information held by state bodies and local self-government bodies 
of the Kyrgyz Republic 2007; Liberia Freedom of Information Act 
2010; The Law of Mongolia on Information Transparency and Right 
to Information 2011; Mozambique Right to Information Law 2014.
39. See for example Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Freedom of 
Information Act 2003, s 30(2).
40. HRC, General Comment No. 16, at [11].
41. HRC, General comment No. 34, at [24].online. The newspaper argued that doing so would be 
against the right to freedom of expression (and arguably 
against the public’s right to access to information) but 
the Court, referring to the right to be forgotten, found the 
restriction was a proportionate limit for the protection of 
the former offender’s privacy.42 It is imaginable that the 
right to be forgotten could be misused to restrict access 
to private information which may be of public interest. 
This further highlights the significance of a correct 
application of the proportionality test when limiting the 
right to access to information for privacy reasons. 
While a legitimate ground for refusal of access,43 
the privacy exemption may also be abused in 
other contexts to halt access to information which 
have public interest value. The misuse of privacy 
exemptions takes many forms including relying on 
privacy exemptions to avoid releasing information 
on corruption, abuse of power by public figures or 
politicians, or human rights or humanitarian law 
violations as well as invoking data protection laws 
to undermine investigative journalism, the latter 
being a concern, for instance, regarding the misuse44 
of the European Union’s General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR).45
When the privacy exemptions are too broad and 
have no limiting factors or are not subject to a public 
interest test, they may be misused. Therefore, any 
legal restriction of ATI based on privacy must provide 
sufficient clarity and guidance for information officers or 
others enforcing the law to “enable them, to ascertain 
what sorts of expression are properly restricted and 
what sorts are not”.46
42. ECtHR, Hurbain v. Belgium (application no. 57292/16), 22 
June 2021. See also, Global Toolkit for Judicial Actors, supra note 
1, at 160-162. 
43. ICCPR, art 19(3)(a) allows restrictions to right to information 
“for respect of the rights or reputation of others”. This is mirrored in 
European Convention on Human Rights, art 10.
44. See for example Raluca Radu, How The GDPR Can Be Used 
To Threaten Investigative Journalists, (European Journalism 
Observatory, 26 November 2018), https://en.ejo.ch/media-
politics/press-freedom/how-the-gdpr-can-be-used-to-threaten-
investigative-journalists, accessed 2 August 2022.
45. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural 
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the 
free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC 
(General Data Protection Regulation), OJ 2016 L 119/1.
46. HRC, General Comment No. 34, at [25]. 9To address this, some ATI laws have limited the scope 
of the privacy exemption in various ways, including 
through imposing a timeframe,47 differential treatment 
of personal data of deceased persons48 or that of public 
figures where the data relates to their activities in their 
role,49 the release of personal information when it has 
implications for someone’s life, health and safety,50 
or through other measures.51 Finally, it is important to 
ensure that a privacy (or other) exemption is not utilised 
for covering up human rights violations or crimes 
against humanity , as acknowledged in some ATI 
legislation.52 That the right to privacy cannot be used 
for limiting ATI when such crimes are in line with the 
view expressed by the Human Rights Committee that 
privacy cannot be “a justification for the muzzling of … 
human rights”.53 While useful in preventing the likely 
misuse of privacy exemptions, the correct application of 
these limits may prove challenging in some instances, 
for example regarding a determination of whether the 
health, personal wealth or marital status of a politician 
or public servant is relevant to their public functions. 
In addition to, or in lieu of the above limits on the 
privacy exemption, a “public interest override” is 
introduced in some ATI legislation.54 Where available, 
the public interest override provisions raise questions 
47. For example, Pakistan Freedom of Information Ordinance, s 
16(c); Saint Kitts and Nevis Freedom of Information Act 2018, s 26
48. For example, Uganda Access to Information Act 2005, s 26.
49. For example, Ethiopia Freedom of the Mass Media and Access 
to Information Proclamation No. 590/2008m, art 16; Lithuania 
Law on the Provision of Information to the Public 1996, s 14(3); 
Pakistan Right of Access to Information Act 2017, s 16(c); Poland 
Act on Access to Public Information 2001, art 5(2); Seychelles 
Access to Information Act 2018, s 21; South Africa Promotion of 
Access to Information Act 2000, s 34; South Sudan Right of Ac -
cess to Information Act 2013, s 25(2); Uganda Access to Informa-
tion Act 2005, s 26.
50. For example, Armenia Law on Freedom of Information 2003, s 
8(3); Ireland Freedom of Information Act 2003, s 37(2).
51. For example, under Islamic Republic of Afghanistan Access to 
Information Law (May 2018 Decree as amended in October 2019), 
art 15(2) a court can approve the disclosure of personal information.
52. See for example Argentina Law on Access to Information 
2016, art 8; Bolivia Supreme Decree No. 28168 of 2005, art 3; 
Guatemala Ley de Acceso a la Información Publica 2008, art 24; 
India The Right to Information Act 2005, art 24; Mexico General 
Act of Transparency and Access to Public Information 2002, art 
115; Tajikistan Law of the Republic of Tajikistan on The Right to 
Access to Information2002, art 5; Tunisia Loi organique n. 22-
2016 du 24 Mars 2016 relative au droit d’Access á l’information 
2011, art 26; Uruguay Ley Nº 18.381 Derecho de Acceso a la 
Información Pública 2008, art 12.
53. HRC, General Comment No. 34, at [23].
54. See “Public interest override” ATI legislation examples.“Public interest override” ATI legislation examples
 ›Albania Law No. 119/2014 on the Right to Information 1999, 
art 17(1); 
 ›Antigua and Barbuda The Freedom of Information Act 2004, 
art 24; 
 ›Argentina Law on Access to Information 2016, art 1; 
 ›Belgium Law N° 94-1724 of 11 April 1994 on the Publicity of 
the Administration, art 6; 
 ›Bulgaria Access to Public Information Act , s 37; 
 ›Canada Access to Information Act 1983, ss 19 and 26; 
 ›China Open Government Information Regulations of the P.R.C. 
2019, art 15; 
 ›Croatia Right of Access to Information Act 2003, art 16; 
 ›Dominican Republic Ley General de Libre Acceso a la 
Información Pública, No. 200-04 2004, art 18; 
 ›Estonia Public Information Act 2000, s 38; 
 ›Fiji Information Act 2018, art 20(k); 
 ›Germany Freedom of Information Act 2005, s 5;
 › Ghana Right to Information Act 2019, ss 17 and 78;
 ›Hungary Act CXII of 2011On Informational Self-determination 
and Freedom of Information 1992, s 5; 
 ›India Right to Information Act 2005, art 8; 
 ›Israel Freedom of Information Law 1998, s 10; 
 ›Kenya Access to Information Act 2016, s 6; 
 ›Liberia Freedom of Information Act 2010, s 4.8; 
 ›Lithuania Law on the Provision of Information to the Public 
1996, art 14(3); 
 ›Malawi Access to Information Act 2016, art 37; 
 ›Maldives Right to Information Acy 2014, s 23; 
 ›Mexico General Act of Transparency and Access to Public 
Information 2002, art 120; 
 ›New Zealand Official Information Act 19823, s 9; 
 ›Nigeria Freedom of Information Act 2011, s 15; 
 ›North Macedonia Law on Free Access to Information of Public 
Character 2006, s 6; 
 ›Poland Act on Access to Public Information 2001, s 5; 
 ›Republic of Korea Act on Disclosure of Information by Public 
Agencies 1996 , art 9(6); 
 ›Republic of Moldova The Law on Access to Information 2000, 
art 8(8); 
 ›Rwanda Law No. 04/2013 Relating to Access to Information 
2013, art 4(3); 
 ›Serbia Law on Free Access to Information of Public Importance 
2003, art 14(2); 
 ›Sierra Leone The Right to Access Information Act 2013, s 21(2); 
 ›Slovenia Access to Public Information Act 2003, s 6(2); 
 ›South Africa Promotion of Access to Information Act 2000, s 46; 
 ›South Sudan Right of Access to Information Act 2013, s 25(2); 
 ›Sri Lanka Right to Information Act 2016, s 5(1); 
 ›Switzerland Freedom of Information Act 2004, art 7(2); 
 ›Tajikistan Law of the Republic of Tajikistan on The Right to 
Access to Information2002, s 14(1); 
 ›Thailand Official Information Act 1997, s 15; 
 ›Türkiye Turkish Law On The Right To Information 2003, art 21; 
 ›Uganda Access to Information Act 2005, s 34; 
 ›Vietnam Law on Access to Information 2016, s 7.3.10of proportionality, reasonableness, and equity. The 
complexities of balancing the right to privacy and 
public interest in personal data are discussed below.
2.4. Balancing public interest, 
RTI, and privacy interests
On the one hand, public interest can limit access to 
information by preventing the disclosure of information 
when doing so would be against the public interest. 
On the other hand, public interest can override other 
grounds for refusal of an access to information request, 
for instance on the basis of protection of privacy. This 
section focuses on the latter role of public interest in 
the ATI and privacy debate.
As mentioned in the previous section, many ATI laws 
contain public interest tests or “override” provisions.55 
Striking a balance between the privacy interests of 
an individual and the interests of public in access 
to personal data of that individual is arguably one of 
the most challenging aspects of the ATI and privacy 
interface. Where such information is provided in ATI 
legislation with regards to public interest, this would 
prove useful: for example, a definition of public interest, 
when public interest tests and overrides are applicable, 
or reference to any additional guidelines. 
The Human Rights Committee in Toktakunov v. 
Kyrgyzstan  expressed the view that a limit on ATI 
on the ground of national security cannot be justified 
when the information is of public interest and relates to 
violations of human rights or international humanitarian 
law.56 This principle could be said to be relevant and 
extend to any limits based on privacy. Furthermore, 
jurisprudence of courts should inform an assessment 
of public interest. The European Court of Human 
Rights famously provided some guidance in its Von 
Hannover v. Germany (No. 2) judgment regarding a 
public interest override of the privacy of public figures.57 
In the United States of America, the “Hubbard 
factors” first established in United States v. Hubbard  
55. See supra note 52 for examples of countries. 
56. Human Rights Committee, Communication No. 1470/2006, 
CCPR/C/101/D/1470/2006; See also Human Rights Council, 
Report, A/HRC/49/38, supra note 32, at [6]. 
57. ECtHR, Von Hannover v. Germany (no. 2) [GC] - 40660/08 
and 60641/08, Judgment 7.2.2012 [GC].are considered as part of a public interest test for 
disclosure of information.58
Disclosure “notices” are also another measure to 
ensure that a reasonable balance is struck between 
ATI and right to privacy. An information officer may 
issue a notice to an individual when granting access 
to documents containing that individual’s personal 
data to a third party, if, on balance, the public 
interest in the disclosure of information outweighs 
the individual’s privacy interests. In some cases, 
this would allow the individual to challenge the 
decision of the information officer, or at least alert the 
individual in question of the potential arm following 
the disclosure of that information. 59 The notice 
function, however, is not currently adopted in the ATI 
legislation of all the countries where a public interest 
override of privacy is provided for. 
Section 5 of the German Federal Freedom of 
Information Act 2005 provides a clear normative 
basis for a balancing of ATI and privacy by stating that 
“access to personal data may only be granted where 
the applicant’s interest in obtaining the information 
outweighs the third party’s interests warranting 
exclusion of access to the information”. The ATI 
legislation in Honduras uses the same balance but 
in reverse, focusing on whether the potential harm 
of disclosure is greater than the public interest in 
accessing the information.60 While the broad language 
of the section provides information authorities with a 
wide discretion in considering and applying a multitude 
of public interest grounds for overriding the privacy 
exemption, it may cause difficulties in determining the 
scope of the override. Further clarification of the public 
interest override may help alleviate these difficulties. 
For instance, as discussed above, direct reference to 
information relating to human rights or humanitarian 
violations, as included in the laws of several Latin 
American countries as well as India and Tunisia, would 
help clarify the scope of a public interest override.61
58. United States v. Hubbard, 650 F.2d 293, 317-22 (D.C. Cir. 
1980).
59. See for example Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Freedom of 
Information Act 2003, s 30(3); Australia Freedom of Information 
Act 1982, s 41(4)(c); Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Freedom of 
Access to Information for Bosnia and Herzegovina 2000, art 9(3).
60. Honduras Ley de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información 
Pública 2006, art 17.
61. See supra note 50. 112.5. Digital and online 
technologies 
While the Internet and new technologies have 
facilitated access to information online, the large scale 
and digital collection, storage, processing and sale or 
transfer of personal data pose privacy risks and new 
challenges for information authorities managing and 
using such datasets and assessing their authorised 
disclosure as part of their obligations to respect, protect 
and fulfil the RTI. As Cannataci and others noted in 
2018, “[t]he conflicts between privacy and freedom 
of expression are intensified by the combination of the 
virtual and physical spheres.”62
During the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, concerns 
have been raised in many countries regarding the 
risk to privacy of individuals whose personal health, 
movement, and vaccination data was collected as part 
of scanning and tracing practices to halt the spread 
62. UNESCO, Joseph A Cannataci and others, “Privacy, free 
expression and transparency: Redefining their new boundaries in 
the digital age” (December 2016, UENSCO Publishing), at 2.4.of the virus,63 reflecting concerns voiced previously 
regarding the “death of privacy” in the 21st century as 
a result of technological and online developments.64 
The 2020 UNESCO Guidelines on the role of judicial 
operators in the protection and promotion of the right to 
freedom of expression during the COVID-19 pandemic 
emphasise the importance of the provision of accurate 
information to the media and the public in general, 
and the need to ensure that any restrictions on ATI are 
compliant with the above-mentioned three-part test.65 
The main difficulties relate to ensuring that personal 
data that may be accessed under ATI guarantees is 
only collected for the intended purpose, is properly 
anonymised, is not held for longer than legal, and is 
63. B Sowmiya et al “A Survey on Security and Privacy Issues in 
Contact Tracing Application
of Covid-19” (2021) 2(136) SN Computer Science; Eugene Y Chan 
and Najam U Saqib “Privacy concerns can explain unwillingness 
to download and use contact tracing apps when COVID-19 
concerns are high” 119 (2021) Computers in Human Behaviour.
64. See for a discussion of this point Cannataci, supra note 62, at 2.1.
65. UNESCO, COVID-19: The role of judicial operators in the 
protection and promotion of the right to freedom of expression: 
Guidelines, (UNESCO, 2020) at 7. 
Identifying the applicable privacy 
ground/exemption1
2
3
4
5
6This should be provided for by law, pursue a legitimate 
aim, and be necessary for a legitimate purpose.
Identifying any public interest override 
provisions in the applicable lawThis could act as the starting point for an assessment of 
the relative weight of the competing interests. 
Assessing the weight of the third party 
or public interest in accessing the 
informationThis involves an assessment of whether the third party 
or public interest in disclosure outweighs the individual’s 
privacy interest in withholding of the information or their 
personal data.
Assessing the potential harm to the 
individual as a result of the disclosure This can be done before or after step 3, depending on 
the wording of the legislation. 
Considering any mitigating actions 
permissible under the law This may include subjecting the release to deletions, 
viewing, copying or distribution conditions, speciﬁc forms 
of release, or release after a “disclosure notice” is issued 
to the individual whose information is being released.
Making an informed and balanced 
decisionThe decision should be communicated to the party 
requesting the information in a timely and clear manner. Under international human rights law a three-part test for limits on the right to access to information and the public 
interest provides a framework for the application of the public interest test:12protected from unauthorised access and security leaks 
and breaches (through the use of malware, spyware, or 
other hacking methods).
In many instances, where information and data are 
collected by information authorities online, users 
may be asked to cede a degree of privacy by way of 
accepting cookies which collect data about them and 
their activity in exchange for access to proactively 
released information. This may relate, for example, 
to the online submission of an access to information 
request which is common in some countries, even if 
the requested information is then provided in another 
manner. In these cases, duty bearer institutions need 
to indicate to users how personal privacy will be 
protected in regard to disclosure practices, for example, 
by proven anonymisation techniques.
Another emerging trend is the increasing role of private 
entities in gatekeeping personal information by way 
of collecting and storing personal data of individuals. 
This has implications for both the right to access to 
information and the right to privacy. With regards 
to the former, the right to access to information is 
traditionally viewed as relating to information held by 
public authorities which is the view many ATI laws 
adopt. This view, however, no longer reflects the 
reality of how private companies collect and store 
personal information. Therefore, access to information 
legislation should address the role of private entities 
as information authorities generally, and in relation to 
private data more specifically. 
Similarly, to ensure the protection of personal data 
collected, held and used by private companies, a 
new legislative approach in adopting or amending 
privacy legislation is needed to ensure respect for and 
protection of the right to privacy. This is particularly 
significant considering the collection of data by social 
media platforms and apps that collect data (e.g. 
weather apps concerning geo-location, menstruation 
apps recording intimate personal information, etc) where users provide identification information or data 
knowingly or not,66 and the increasing use of artificial 
intelligence (AI) in the collection and use of personal 
data.67 UNESCO has previously called for greater 
transparency in this field.68 
This change in approach is already under way in 
countries where the ATI legislation refers to private 
bodies holding personal data and in those where 
the national law mirrors the provisions in the GDPR 
which replaced the EU Data Protection Directive of 
1995.69 In addition to State entities, the provisions on 
access to information in the Model Inter-American 
Law on Access to Public Information apply to “private 
organizations which operate with substantial public 
funds or benefits (directly or indirectly) or which perform 
public functions and services insofar as it applies to 
those funds or to the public services or functions they 
undertake”.70 Similarly, the Model Law on Access to 
Information for Africa (discussed further below) also 
applies to private bodies and the information they hold 
which “may assist in the exercise of protection of any 
right”.71 The significance of all this is that going forward 
ATI legislation may need to grapple with this issue 
of privately-held data and information which has a 
bearing on the public interest.
66. Human Rights Council, “Disinformation and freedom of opinion 
and expression: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion 
and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression” 
UN Doc A/HRC/47/25 (13 April 2021) at [66].
67. See for a discussion of the relevance of AI to ATI and privacy, 
Article 19 and Privacy International, “Privacy and freedom of 
expression in an age of artificial intelligence” (London, 2018); 
Human Rights council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the 
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression” UN Doc A/73/348 (29 August 2018).
68. UNESCO, Letting the Sun Shine In: Transparency and 
Accountability in the Digital Age (UNESCO, 2021). 
69. European Parliament, Directive on the protection of individuals 
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data (adopted on 24 October 1995, entered into 
force 13 December 1995).
70. Model Inter-American Law on Access to Public Information, 
AG/RES. 2607 (XL-O/10), (Adopted at the fourth plenary session, 
held on June 8, 2010), art 3
71. African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, Model 
Law on Access to Information for Africa, s 2(b).13 3.1. ATI and privacy legislation 
As of August 2021, 132 UN Member States have adopted 
access to information legal guarantees.72 Additionally, 
as of May 2022, 141 UN Member States were identified 
to have adopted privacy legislation which means that 
107 countries - slightly over half of the UN Member 
States - have legislative frameworks covering both the 
right to information and the right to privacy.
Among the States with ATI legislation, almost all 
(130 States) appear to have included direct or indirect 
exemptions for the protection of privacy in their laws.73 
While there are some similarities between these 
provisions, the scope of the exemptions, the language 
used, and the limitations placed upon them are 
greatly varied. This shows the lack of a universal and 
coherent approach to balancing ATI and the protection 
of the privacy interests of individuals in their private 
information and personal data.
3.2. Soft law approaches to ATI 
and privacy
A number of soft law initiatives address the interface of 
ATI and privacy. An early example of this is the 1990 
UN Guidelines for the Regulation of Computerized 
Personal Data Files which, among other things, 
72. UNESCO, “To Recovery and Beyond: 2021 UNESCO Report on 
Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)”, (UNESCO, 2022) at [7].
73. Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, 
Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, 
Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina 
Faso, Canada, Chile, China, Côte D’Ivoire, Croatia, Czech republic, 
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, 
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, 
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, 
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, 
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, 
The Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North 
Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Peru, Philippines, 
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, 
Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent 
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Seychelles, 
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, 
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor 
Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, 
The United Kingdom, The United States, Uruguay, Vanuatu, 
Vietnam, Yemen, Zimbabwe.address the interface of access to information and 
privacy in its principle 4 on access to one’s own 
personal data, and principle 6 on exceptions to privacy 
for public interest reasons.74
The Declaration of Principles on Freedom of 
Expression in Africa adopted in 2002 “sets out core 
elements of the right of access to information.”75 Later 
on in 2010, the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of 
Expression and Access to Information of the African 
Commission on Human and People’s Rights (correct?) 
created the Model Law on Access to Information for 
Africa, with access to information laws being adopted 
consequently in 10 African countries.76 The ’boom’ in 
adoption of ATI legislation in Africa is partly attributed 
to the adoption of the Model Law, which highlights the 
importance of soft law measures to the creation of 
legal frameworks.77 
While the African Model Law does not explicitly 
mention privacy, it allows the refusal of an access 
to information request if it “would involve the 
unreasonable disclosure of personal information”.78 
This privacy exemption, however, is not adopted by all 
African countries with ATI legislation. The same is true 
about the need to inform a third party whose personal 
information is being considered for disclosure, which is 
another criteria under the Model Law.79 Additionally, 
while the Model Law states that a public interest in 
disclosure of information that outweighs the potential 
harm caused will override a privacy exemption, 
some African countries have chosen not to adopt the 
override,80 while others have it as a discretionary, 
rather than absolute, measure.81 
74. UN Guidelines for the Regulation of Computerized Personal 
Data Files, Adopted by General Assembly resolution 45/95 of 14 
December 1990.
75. Ololade Shyllon (ed) The Model Law on Access to Information 
for Africa and other regional instruments: Soft law and human 
rights in Africa (Pretoria university Law Press, 2018), at vi.
76. Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, 
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Sudan and Tanzania.
77. Fola Adeleke “The Impact of the Model Law on Access to Infor -
mation for Africa” in Shyllon, supra note 75, at 21. 
78. Model Law on Access to Information for Africa 2010, s 27(1).
79. Model Law, s 39. 
80. See for example Mozambique Law no. 34 /2014 of 31 December.
81.See for example Kenya’s Access to Information Act, s 6(4). 3. Mapping the legal landscape14The 2010 Organisation of American States’ Model 
Inter-American Law on Access to Public Information 
and its Implementation Guidelines was another 
example of a soft law initiative on addressing the 
interface of ATI and privacy in a regional legal 
framework. As discussed above, the Organization of 
American States’ General Assembly adopted a new 
Model Law in 2020 which will help update the ATI 
and privacy laws of its member states.
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) Guidelines on the Protection of 
Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data were 
adopted tin 2013 or help harmonise national privacy 
legislation to “prevent interruptions in international 
flows” of personal data.82
While the EU GDPR mentioned earlier is binding law 
in all EU member states, it has also been used as a 
model law in a number of non-EU countries83 and its 
principles on personal data can inform law reform in 
other countries. At the same time, many countries do 
not have similar privacy protections, which may result 
in additional complications where for example an app 
headquartered in one country garners data from users 
of the app in another jurisdiction.
3.3. Judicial approaches to ATI 
and privacy
Rulings from courts in various jurisdictions demonstrate 
the clashes of the right to access to information and the 
right to privacy. The courts’ reasoning and decisions 
can help inform policy and law making as well as 
the conduct of information and privacy authorities. 
Similar to balancing other human rights, international 
courts have adopted the principle of proportionality 
when balancing the right to information and privacy. 
In cases involving the balancing of the right to privacy 
against other rights, the European Court of Human 
Rights relies on the three-part test in article 8 of the 
European Court of Human Rights. The three-part test, 
already presented, used by the European Court of 
82. OECD, Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder 
Flows of Personal Data, 1980 Preface. 
83. For example, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Japan, Kenya, Mauritius, 
Republic of Korea, South Africa and Turkey. Human Rights is based on the concepts of lawfulness, 
legitimacy, and necessity in a democratic society.84
In Claude Reyes et al. v. Chile , the Inter-American Court 
of Human Rights (IACtHR) emphasised the need for an 
information authority to clearly communicate and justify 
any withholding of documents that contain information 
of public interest, to avoid a violation of the RTI.85 
While the case did not involve a privacy exemption, the 
same dicta regarding clear communication of refusal 
or redaction grounds can arguably apply to cases of 
application of privacy exemptions. 
The case of Gomes Lund v. Brazil showcases the 
intersection of access to personal and family data and 
ATI in a context where the rights complement each 
other. In this case, the IACtHR affirmed its previous 
rulings that the public has a right to know the truth about 
human rights violations, even if information about such 
events is exempted from disclosure under secrecy 
laws. The Court also, for the first time, recognised 
that the right of relatives of victims of human rights 
violations to know the truth, is part of the right to seek 
and receive information.86 T h i s  r u l i n g  a n d  i t s  r a t i o  
can provide persuasive authority for other courts and 
tribunals where the application of a privacy exemption, 
regarding ordinary individuals or public figures, can be 
ignored in cases of human rights violations. 
The case of Saket v. Union of India brought to light a 
unique aspect of the interface of ATI and privacy by 
addressing the privacy rights of individuals making ATI 
applications for access to information. In 2020, the 
High Court of Bombay in this case held that the online 
publication of the personal information of an applicant 
that had submitted multiple access to information 
requests was a breach of his right to privacy, as 
well as a disregard for the purpose of India’s Right to 
Information Act 2005.87
84. See for more on this points and decisions of the ECtHR, 
Guidelines for Judicial Actors on Privacy and Data Protection, 
supra note 1, at 7.
85. Order of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Case of 
Claude-Reyes et al. v. Chile, Judgment of September 19, 2006.
86. Inter-American Court of Human Rights Case of Gomes Lund 
Et Al. (“Guerrilha Do Araguaia”) V. Brazil, Judgment of November 
24, 2010.
87. Bombay High Court, Saket S Gokhale vs The Union of India on 
5 November, 2020.15A recent ECtHR decision shows that a failure to strike 
the right balance between ATI and privacy may lead 
to a violation of human rights. In its 2020 ruling in 
Centre for Democracy and the Rule of Law v. Ukraine , 
the Court decided that the education and work history 
of a number of top Ukrainian politicians included in 
their official CVs were personal information of public 
interest and the Government’s failure to disclose that 
information to an NGO constituted a breach of RTI.
4. Information 
and privacy 
authorities
In some countries an institution may have a dual 
mandate which relates to both ATI and privacy rights,88 
while in others there are two separate commissions or 
authorities in relation to each right.89 Others yet have 
designated an existing entity, such as their Human 
Rights Commission, as the oversight body for RTI.90
The ATI law in Australia, like in some other countries,91 
requires the Information Commissioner to publish 
guidelines for various issues covered in the Freedom 
of Information (FOI) Act,92 for example with regards 
to public interest factors. Information providers or 
the Minister must in turn “have regard” to any such 
guidelines.93 The Australian Information and Privacy 
Commissioner has issued guidelines on both FOI94 and 
88. For example, the New Zealand Privacy Commissioner (work -
ing together with the Ombudsman) is the oversight authority for 
both rights.
89. For example, in Chile, the Transparency Council (Del Consejo 
para la Transparencia) was established under s 31 of the Trans -
parency of public office and access to the information of the State 
Administration law 2008 with regards to RTI; and the Data Privacy 
Authority was established under the Bill No. 11144-07 which 
amends Laws 19.628 and regulates the processing and protection 
of personal data.
90. Malawi Access to Information Act 2016, s 7. 
91. See for example Bahamas Freedom of Information Act 2017.
92. Freedom of Information Act 1982, s 93A(1).
93. S 11B(5).
94. FOI Guidelines, Guidelines issued by the Australian Informa-
tion Commissioner under s 93A of the Freedom of Information Act 
1982.privacy.95 The FOI guidelines, for instance, explain that 
the fact that the privacy exemption in the FOI Act in 
Australia is subject to a public interest test signifies that 
the exemption is “weighted in favour of disclosure”.96 
This would arguably be of value to an information 
officer assessing an application for disclosure of 
documents containing personal data and potentially 
leading to an invasion of privacy. 
In New Zealand, with an ATI legislation similar to 
that of Australia’s, the Privacy Commissioner has 
issued guidelines on the right to privacy in the 
form of “Privacy Codes of Practice”97 and “Privacy 
Principles” with the latter mainly relating to collection 
and use of personal information.98 Principle 6 states 
that individuals have a right to ask for access to their 
own personal information and Principle 11 limits the 
disclosure of personal information to specific cases, 
including if doing so is “necessary to uphold or enforce 
the law”. The wording in Principle 11 is in line with a 
public interest override of a privacy exemption. The 
Commission also launched the “Privacy is precious” 
campaign to raise awareness about the changes to 
the rules about protection of and access to personal 
data introduced in the new Privacy Act 2020.99
Part of UN States’ obligations under article 19 of the 
ICCPR, and in the context of proactive disclosure 
specifically, is to make available any information 
that is necessary for the exercise of human rights.100 
Therefore, information and privacy authorities can help 
States fulfil this obligation by leading the development 
and distribution of information that is essential to the 
exercise of both ATI and privacy rights of individuals. 
95. Australian Privacy Principles Guidelines, Privacy Act 1988, 
https://www.oaic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/1125/
app-guidelines-july-2019.pdf, accessed 2 August 2022.
96. FOI Guidelines, at [1.14].
97. Under the Privacy Act 2020, the codes of practice become 
part of law in New Zealand. The Commissioner has currently is -
sued 6 codes of practice relating to issues such as credit reporting 
privacy and health information privacy. https://www.privacy.org.
nz/privacy-act-2020/codes-of-practice/. 
98. https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-2020/privacy-princi-
ples/.
99. https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-2020/campaign/.
100. Annual Report of The Inter-American Commission on Human 
Rights, Report of the Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom 
of Expression, OEA/Ser.L/V/II.134 (25 February 2009), at [147] 
and [161].16
Conclusion and 
recommendations
This brief overview of the current intersection of the right to access to information and right to 
privacy highlights a number of both long existing and emerging challenges. The main themes at 
the intersection of the two rights relate to the protection of and access to personal data, privacy 
exemptions to RTI, and the balancing of public interest against privacy interests of individuals in 
their personal data. Based on the above observations, the below recommendations are made:
1. States should provide a definition of key concepts such as privacy, personal data, personal 
information, information authority, etc., in their existing ATI and/or privacy legislation to help 
guide implementation. These definitions must be in line with international human rights 
standards on ATI and the right to privacy. This should also be done with due consideration 
given to the interface of the right to information and privacy as they mutually shape one 
another. In countries without ATI and/or privacy legislation, the significance of definitions in 
light of the interconnectedness of the two rights should be paramount when adopting laws 
and policies.
2. States should provide for specific habeas data provisions in their ATI and/or privacy 
legislation that allow individuals to find out if and what personal information about them is 
held by public and private entities. This should also include the individual’s ability to request 
that incorrect or incomplete information is rectified, or that certain data is removed from the 
entity’s databases if the purpose for the initial collection and/or holding of the data no longer 
applies. This would ensure that any such legislative provisions adhere to the principles of 
transparency, quality, accuracy, and access in relation to personal data protection.
3. States should include a comprehensive and sufficiently precise and accessible framework 
for balancing the restriction of ATI on the basis of protection of privacy interests and the role 
of the public interest in that balance in regard to ATI and/or privacy legislation. This should 
take account of existing international human rights standards, particularly the three-part test 
related to two both rights and the principle of proportionality. Such a framework must include 
multiple components:
a. Provision of a privacy exemption that limits the right to access to information when 
disclosure of information would breach an individual’s right to privacy;
b. Provision of a “public interest override” of the privacy exemption generally which is 
subject to a proportionality test that weighs up harms to the two rights and enables 
the least intrusive option;
c. Provision of a specific limit on the privacy exemption in relation to information about 
public authorities or figures which relates to their public functions and is of public 
importance; and,
d. Provision of a specific limit on the privacy exemption in relation to information 
about violations of human rights, crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide, 
environmental and climate change related offenses, and similar matters.17
4. In cases of a decision to disclose otherwise exempted private information and personal data 
on the ground of public interest or by a ruling of a court or similar authority, States should 
require the relevant information authority, for example the information and/or privacy 
commissioner, to attempt to notify the individual whose non-anonymised personal data is 
subject to disclosure and give that person the opportunity to challenge the disclosure. 
5. As part of a well-balanced normative framework on ATI and the right to privacy, States should 
provide for independent oversight, review, appeal, and remedy mechanisms in relation to 
both rights, either separately or jointly. As the ATI and data protection increasingly overlap, 
any such framework should take into account the need for an interconnected and inclusive 
protection of both rights. This means that appeal and oversight mechanisms should actively 
consider and balance the interface of ATI and personal data protection. 
6. In addition to the adoption of a national legislative framework, States should ensure that the 
norms balancing the two rights are properly enforced. Effective enforcement would require 
the dedication of sufficient resources and provision of appropriate training for administrative 
and judicial authorities to ensure that they strike the right balance when manoeuvring the 
overlap of ATI and right to privacy. 
7. States should make relevant information publicly available about access to public information 
generally, access to personal data specifically, and the available legal and other measures 
for the protection of individuals’ privacy. This will let the public know what information and 
data are available, including elements that may ultimately be drawn from users themselves.
8. States could consider reviewing ATI laws, as balanced with the right to privacy, in relation to 
their applicability to personal and other data that is collected and used by private actors. 
9. In applying the relevant laws, information and privacy commissioners and judicial actors must 
ensure that any restrictions on ATI and freedom of the press due to privacy concerns are 
proportionate and necessary. This is because they play a fundamental role in ensuring that 
privacy exemptions are not abused and that the right balance is struck between the protection 
of privacy and the public interest.