 
216 EX/19.II 
 
 Job: 202300615
 
 
 
  
Item 19 of the pr
 ovisional agenda  
IMPLEMENTATION OF STANDARD-SETTING INSTRUMENTS  
PART II 
IMPLEMENT ATION OF THE 2003 RECOMMENDATION  
CONCERNING THE PROMOTION AND USE OF MULTILINGUALISM AND  
UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO CYBERSPACE  – CONSOLIDATED  REPORT  
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATION 
SUMMARY  
In accordance with 177 EX/Decision 35.I and 196 EX/Decision 20, 
40 C/Resolution 93 and 214 EX/Decision 13.IV , the Director -
General submits to the 216 th session of the Executive Board the fifth 
consolidated report on the implementation of the 
2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of 
Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace, before its 
transmission to the General Conference at its 42nd session . 
No financial and administrative implications are anticipated from the proposed decision.  
Decision required: paragraph 32.  
  
 PARIS, 4 April  2023 
Original : English  Executive Board  
Two hundred and  sixteenth  session  216 EX/19.II  
 INTRODUCTION 
1. The Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal 
Access to Cyberspace ( hereinafter “the 2003 Recommendation”) was adopted on 15 October 2003 
by the General Conference at its 32 nd session . At its 33rd session, in October 2005, the General 
Conference requested each Member State to prepare and submit to the Secretariat a first report on 
such measures by January 2007, and subsequently once every four years with effect from that date (33 C/Resolution 54).  
2. T he submission by Member States of reports on actions taken on UNESCO 
recommendations adopted by the General Conference is provided under Article VIII of the Constitution, as well as under Article 17 of the Rules of Procedure concerning recommendations to Member States and international conventions covered by the terms of Article IV, paragraph 4, of the Constitution.  
3. At its 214th session, the Executive Board approved guidelines for the preparation of reports 
by Member States on the implementation of the 2003 Recommendation and r equested the Director -
General to submit to it at its 216th session the fifth  consolidated report on the implementation of the 
2003 Recommendation, with a view to transmitting that report, together with the Executiv e Board ’s 
comments thereon, to the General Conference at its 42nd session.  
FIFTH CONSOLIDATED REPORT  
4. Following the adoption of 40 C/Resolution 93, the Director-General  by a letter dated 6 July 
2022 (ref. CL/4392), invited all Member States to transmit to the Organization their reports on the 
implementation of the 2003 Recommendation by 15 November 2022. The deadline for the 
submission of reports was extended until 20 January 2023.  
5. Several responses were  received after this deadline, and as of 15 February  2023 the 
Secretariat had received a total  of 31 reports from the following Member States: Albania, Armenia , 
Brazil , Bulgaria , Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile , Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire , Cyprus, Djibouti, 
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Malaysia, Malta, 
Mexico , Mongolia, Myanmar , Peru , Russian Federation, Sierra Leone, Switzerland and Türkiye.  
6. Twenty -one Member States  that reported used a multistakeholder approach while preparing 
the country reports. They  reported that they consulted g overnmental organizations, the National  
Commission for UNESCO, National Committees of intergovernmental programmes, professional  
associations and non-governmental  organi zations while preparing reports. Albania, Brazil, Burkina 
Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’ Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, India, Japan, 
Latvia, Malta, Mongolia, Peru, Russian Federation, Sierra Leone, Switzerland and Türkiye organized 
such consultations on the aegis of the concerned ministries, while  the other countries  prepared the 
report through the relevant National Commission of UNESCO. Out of the Member States  that 
reported, 10 Member States  (Brazil, C hile, Colombia, C ôte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Japan, Latvia, Peru, 
Russian Federation and Türkiye) have translated the 2003 Recommendation in their n ational and/or 
regional languages . 
Elements for reporting on the specific provisions of the 2003 Recommendation 
Development of multilingual content and systems  
7. Fourteen Member States  that submitted reports covering the reporting period of 2018-2022 
have taken concrete measures to support the promotion, access, and use of languages, particularly 
in education, media and I nternet. Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, Chile, Côte d’ Ivoire, 
Cyprus, Finland, Ghana, Malta, Mexico, Russian Federation, Sierra Leone and Latvia have taken 
constituti onal measures to enhance multilingualism. Albania, Armenia, Bulgaria, Ecuador, Estonia, 
India, Kazakhstan, Peru and Malaysia have taken policy and legislative measures to enhance 216 EX/ 19.II – page 2 
multilingualism . Japan and Mongolia have leveraged research and technological development to 
enhance multilingualism  in their  respective countries. Malta and Türkiye have issued special 
directives for the promotion of multilingualism  in their  countr ies.  
8. Brazil has enacted special provision  in the country to align multilingualism with  Article  19 of 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . Burkina Faso has developed educational measures  and 
developed new pedagogical approaches  for multilingualism . Canada has enacted special provisions  
and s trengthened access to services . Colombia has implemented a dedicated law for 
multilingualism . Estonia has made multilingual content in all government announcements mandatory  
and has developed an automated process that makes all  news and government announcements  
available in different languages. Latvia is promoting multilingualism through its “Digital Humanities ” 
initiative, which provides comprehensive language technology services to enhance language 
diversity . Finland has enacted constitutional  provisions to ensure multilingualism . Ghana has 
developed applications  to aid translation services in the country. Japan’ s Internal  Affairs and 
Communications Ministry is promoting research and development for further advancement of 
multilingual tr anslation technology, such as the realization of simultaneous interpretation using 
artificial intelligence (AI). Similarly, Malta  has enacted a five -year long strategy and promotes the 
use of AI to support multilingualism  in cyberspace. Mexico’ s constituti on affirms the need to preserve 
and enrich languages , knowledge and all the elements that constitute s the country ’s culture and 
identity and has taken measures to strengthen multilingualism in the country. Russian Federation 
reported taking measures at the national, regional and municipal level to prevent the emergence of 
language barriers  by enacting special mandatory provisions, as well as preserving Indigenous  
languages in cyberspace. Sierra Leone has  a dedicated educational program me for four languages,  
while  efforts are being made to expand coverage to include several other languages. Türkiye uses 
education, media and social media to enhance multilingualism  in the country . Out of those Member 
States  that responded to the questionnaire, Armenia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, India, Latvia, Malta, Mexico, Myanmar, Russian Federation and Sierra Leone reported steps to create national policies on multilingualism  in cyberspace.   
9. Several Member States  have taken steps to increase the availability of multilingual content 
and language descriptions, such as dictionaries, glossaries, grammar, statistical models  (Armenia, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Côte d ’Ivoire , Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, 
Ghana, India, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru, Russian Federation, Sierra Leone, and Türkiye).  
10. Several Member States  reported on the availability of o perating system in multiple languages  
and noted increasing use of such o perating system s. Similarly, Armenia, Latvia, Malaysia and Malta 
reported private sector and software developers ’ efforts  in creating browsers, search engines , 
dictionaries , automated translation systems  and i ntelligent linguistic systems capable of information 
retrieval  and abstracting. Japan is supporting the creation of speech translation services and 
document translation services by opening the use of translation engines to private companies 
through license agreements. Mexico is implementing “Endless Oaxaca multilingüe, ” to make several 
operating systems available in Indigenous  languages. Latvia is implementing a speech synthesis  
and virtual assistant system . Russian Federation also reported measures to adapt operating systems 
to a multilingual environment. Sierra Leone has developed new keyboards to support local 
languages, but they are yet to be popularized. All Member States who responded noted taking 
measures to standardize writing system with full script encoding.  
11.  Armenia, Burkina Faso, Canada, Colombia, Estonia, Finland, Ghana, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, 
Russian Federation, and Türkiye have taken measures to increase the level of sign language(s) ’ 
asynchronicity for  a wide range of users . Malta has developed it through  collaboration between the 
Foundation for Information Technology Accessibility (FITA), the University of Malta and the Malta Information Technology Agency (MITA ) to enhance on-demand learning experience of signed 
languages for persons with different levels  of hearing ability . Ecuador  highlighted a specific  initiative 
to accelerate digital integration in linkage with the “Política Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial ”. 216 EX/19. II – page 3 
Colombia’ s MinTIC Resolution 1519 of 2020 ensures standards of accessibility for all persons with 
disabilities.  
12. Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, India, 
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru and Russian Federation 
reported consultation with Indigenous  people while launching their multilingualism efforts in 
cyberspace.  
13. Most Member States that indicated taking several measures to build capacity of local 
communities, particularly Indigenous  peoples . These included the development of regulatory policies, 
standardization and digitization of content, establishing of funding mechanisms, i ntroduction of new 
intellectual property and copyright protection measures, training and skills development programmes , 
development of content in different formats, support in the development of language technology, 
resources and other tools, enhancement in infrastructure and connectivity . For example, Canada  
has created an Indigenous Screen Office (ISO) to support the development, production, and 
marketing of Indigenous content. Chile implements the “Indigenous and Afro-descendant Cultural 
Revitalization Program ”, and populates material related to Indigenous  languages online.  
Facilitating access to networks and services  
14. Broadband connectivity and access to public high-speed Internet has been enhanced 
throughout public and educational institutions such as libraries, museums, community centers, governmental  buildings, post offices, hospitals and other public spaces . Most Member States who 
reported noted having policy measures to promote access to the Internet as a service of public 
interest (Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’ Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Estonia, 
Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, Malta, Mongolia, Peru, Russian Federation and Türkiye) . Many Member 
States, which responded to the survey indicated an increase in the digitalization in educational 
institutions  and more digitalization processes for social welfare and services. These changes have 
taken a quantum jump after the COVID -19 pandemic. Since 2020, not only did Member States  take 
measures to expand digital services, but also strengthened bandwidth and increased Internet 
penetration.  
15. To increase digital content online, a few Member States reported new data collection efforts, 
the organiz ation of public outreach campaigns  and the c elebration of international campaigns such 
as the International Year of Indigenous Languages and the International Decade of Indigenous 
Languages 2022-2032. Similarly, to enhance online inclusion, many  Member States  (Armenia, Chile, 
Ecuador, Estonia, Russian Federation, Switzerland and Türkiye ) have taken measures to reduce 
tariffs for broadband connectivity or have provided all e-services free of cost to citizens. Most 
Member States  have kept a close watch on the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), 
the Intergovernmental Information for All Programme (IFAP), the International Programme for the 
Development of Communication (IPDC), the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) and g overning 
structures of the 2019 International Year of Indigenous Languages and International Decade of 
Indigenous Languages 2022-2032 for their contributions to enhance multilingualism by developing 
new tools, contents and processes. 
Development of public domain content 
16. Access to public and government held records and information on governmental activities is 
being regulated by laws related to copyright, transparency, accessibility or information according to several reports of Member States . The majority of Member States reported a constant and increas ed 
development of governmental data provision services and existing e-governmental open data portals in different languages .  
17. Albania, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Estonia, 
Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Malta, Mongolia, Russian Federation and Sierra Leone have 
adopted measures to give effect to the pr ovisions of the 2003 R ecommendation. There is an 216 EX/ 19.II – page 4 
encouraging trend for enacting new or leveraging  existing administrative and legal measures to 
ensure development of and access to public domain information. Twenty countries have developed 
new or enforced existing legal and administrative measures for public domain information (Albania, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Côte d ’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Ghana, 
India, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Malta, Mongol ia, Russian Federation and Sierra Leone). 
18. Member States have taken institutional measures to support enhanced multilingual online 
services, resources and tools targeting women and girls, Indigenous  peoples and those living in 
remote areas and persons with disabilities. To enhance content for women and girls, Albania, Brazil, 
Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, C ôte d’ Ivoire, Djibouti, Estonia, Ghana, India, Latvia, 
Malaysia, Malta, Mongolia and Russian Federation have taken concrete measures . Similarly, 
Albania, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Mongolia, Peru and 
Russian Federation have taken measures to support multilingualism online for Indigenous  peoples 
and those living in remote areas . Albania, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, C ôte d’ Ivoire, 
Estonia, Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Mongolia, Russian Federation, and Türkiye  have 
also taken measures  to create content for persons living with disabilities .  
19. Nineteen Member States  have taken steps to strengthen, support and establish open 
repositories, open solutions, technical and methodological standards for information exchange, as 
well as online accessibility of public domain information (Armenia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, 
Canada, Chile, Colombia, C ôte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Ghana, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, 
Malta, Mongolia, Peru and Russian Federation).  
20. Out of those who reported, 19 Member States  indicated that they have made specific 
international cooperative arrangements to provide universal access to information in the public 
domain to counter geographical, economic, social or cultural discrimination (Albania, Brazil, Burkina 
Faso, Chile, Colombia, Estonia, Ghana, Latvia, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru, Russian Federation and 
Sierra Leone).  
21. Twenty -two Member States have  taken measures to collect official  language data (Albania, 
Armenia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Chile, C ôte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, 
Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru, Russian Federation and 
Sierra Leone). Similarly,  24 of the reporting Member States have nominated  a focal point for the 
UNESCO World Atlas of Languages , contributing to mapping language diversity . 
22. Increasingly, Member  States ar e including language as an integral parameter for their 
national census  (Albania, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, C ôte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Estonia, 
India, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru and Russian Federation). Some Member States 
have also launched focused research on multilingualism  (Brazil, Bulgaria, Latvia, Malaysia, Mexico 
and  Russian Federation).   
23. Twenty Member States  that reported on the 2003 Recommendation have  taken measures to 
strengthen the production of multilingual cultural information and communication (Albania, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Ghana, India, Japan, 
Latvia, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru, Russian Federation and Sierra Leone). Their efforts are 
manifested in terms of publishing, sound recording, motion picture and dedicated television 
programmes . Member States have also taken measures to ensure digital languages usage in texting 
and messaging, social  media, blogs, web pages, e-books , edutainment products and services. 
Brazil, Ghana, India, Latvia, Malaysia, Peru and Russian Federation have launched dedicated 
machine translation initiatives.  
24. Seventeen M ember States have taken measures to produce multilingual content in line with 
international  normative instruments  (Albania, Brazil, Canada, C hile, Colombia, C ôte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, 
Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Mongolia, Peru and Russian 
Federation).  216 EX/19. II – page 5 
25. Sixteen Member  States have taken measures to ensure web accessibility of multilingual 
public domain information, including that for (Albania, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, C ôte d’Ivoire, 
Cyprus, Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Mongolia and Russian 
Federation). Brazil , Estonia, Japan, Malaysia, Mongolia and Russian Federation have also ratified 
the international normative instruments such as the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (2003) .  
26. Reaffirming the equitable balance between the interest of rights -holders and the public 
interest, amendments of copyright legislations including additional measures have been adopted by 
several Member States. In this regard, Brazil , Canada, Ghana, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, Malta, 
Mongolia, Russian Federation and Switzerland have taken actions to update their  national copyright 
legislation and its adaptation to multilingualism and access to information in cyberspace. In Japan, 
a law amended in 2020 made it possible to transmit copyrighted work items to overseas libraries. 
Malta is  currently reviewing its  Copyright Act considering recent developments in the digital age.  
27. Several Member States reported steps to adhere to or have ratified the WIPO Copyright 
Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT)  since their adoption 
(Canada, Colombia, Cô te d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, Malaysia, 
Malta, Rus sian Federation, Switzerland and Türkiye).  Similarly, Ghana, India, Japan, Latvia, 
Malaysia, Malta, Mongolia, Russian  Federation, Switzerland and Türkiye have carried out capacity 
building initiatives in support of national copyright legislation within the scope of international 
agreements  and technological developments. These Member States  have also encouraged right-
holders to release more multilingual content and provide access to resources using open licenses, particularly Open Educational Resources for language learning. Three Member States  have adopted 
Open Licensing practices  to release multilingual content online (Armenia, Russian  Federation and 
Türkiye).  
28. To implement the International Decade of Indigenous Languages six of the reporting Member 
States  have taken measures  to prepare a national action plan ( Bulgaria, Canada, Chile , Latvia, 
Mexico  and Switzerland).  
CONCLUSION  
29. Reporting on the implementation of the 2003 Recommendation has seen an increase in 
responses , from 17 in 2019, to 31 responses  in 2023. This renewed interest could be attributed to 
the International Year of Indigenous Languages 2019, the ongoing International Decade of 
Indigenous Languages  and the relevance of multilingualism and linguistic diversity in the response 
to the COVID -19 pandemic.  
30. It is imperative to underscore again that for the reporting mechanisms to be effective, it is 
indispensable to have the number of Member States participating in the reporting process significantly increased.  
31. According to the reports submitted by Member States, progress has been achieved in some 
areas and the following challenges were observed: 
(a) The reports  from Member States  show that there is a growing recognition for  
multilingualism  on the Internet. Member States have taken measures to enhance 
universal, free and open online access to multilingual knowledge and information, taking 
advantage of technical developments and AI. I nitiatives  have been taken to foster 
innovation and facilitate access, digitalization, transmission and distribution of digital 
information, particularly from scientific and public domains  at national levels  through 
legislative measures . Institutions have been established to monitor, implement and 
assess the effectiveness of activities undertake n. 216 EX/19. II – page 6 
(b) The reporting Member States also suggested that the 2003 Recommendation should be 
further disseminated through news services and ministries. For this, it is recommended 
to give more support and capacity building to local organizations or relevant 
governmental institutions.  
(c) Support to develop national action plans for the promotion and application of the 2003 
Recommendation were also suggested for more effective outreach and policy 
implementation. The advancement in the use of emerging technologies, including AI, 
and wide-ranging networks for broadband access, primarily in small towns, rural and 
remote areas with small  population is still to be addressed in policy initiatives. Some 
Member States reported on the difficulty of implement existing legislation as there is a 
lack of funding  and access to submarine cables .  
(d) The reports include information on recent revisions of the national right to information laws and national regulations , which contribute to building good governance and 
ensuring participatory process es for citizens using different languages in society. There 
is a marked improvement in the use of multilingualism  within the implementation by 
Member States  of several other recommendations and conventions of the U nited Nations  
and UNESCO.  
(e) Lack of policies for o penness continues to dampen the effort to populate multilingualism  
content online. The need for capacity enhancement and establishment of shared 
infrastructure are essential . Member States have also suggested undertaking focused 
South-South and t riangular cooperation to share and upscale solutions online.  
PROPOSED DRAFT DECISION  
32. In light of the above, the Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision along the following 
lines: 
The Executive Board, 
1. Bearing in mind Member States ’ obligations under Article VIII of UNESCO ’s Constitution 
and Article 17 of the Rules of Procedure concerning recommendations to Member States 
and international conventions covered by the terms of Article IV, paragraph 4, of the 
Constitution,  
2. R ecalling 177 EX/Decision 35.I and  196 EX/Decision 20 on the Specific multi -stage 
procedure for the monitoring of the implementation of UNESCO conventions and 
recommendations for which no specific institutional mechanism is provided,  
3. Al so recalling  40 C/Resolution 93 and 214 EX/Decision 13.IV ,  
4. Having examined documents 216 EX/19.II and 216 EX/19. II.INF  and the report of the 
Committee on Conventions and Recommendations  (CR)  thereon (document 216 EX/…), 
5. R eaffirms  the importance of the 2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and 
Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace  and its implementation by 
Member States;  
6. Tak es note that 31 Member States submitted reports for the f ifth consultation, which 
represents an 82% increase in the responsiveness of Member States , compared to their 
responsiveness in the previous consultation; 
7. R ecommends  that the General Conference invite those Member States which have not  
taken measures to implement the 2003 Recommendation concerning the Promotion and 216 EX/19. II – page 7 
Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace  to do so and to provide the 
required reports on its implementation; 
8. Requests  the Director-General to transmit to the General Conference at its 42nd session 
the fifth consolidated report on the implementation of the 2003 Recommendation 
concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to 
Cyberspace , together with the Executive Board’ s observations  thereon, and any 
observations or comments that the Director -General may wish to make.   
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
    
 
    
Printed on recycled paper  