We need 
your support
Internet for
DemocracyAudrey Azoulay 
UNESCO Director-General
António Guterres 
United Nations 
Secretary-GeneralRegulating Digital Platforms
for Information as a Public Good
UNESCO GLOBAL CONFERENCE 
21-23 February 2023“We cannot leave it to private 
companies to resolve this existential 
issue themselves, as their business 
models will continue to favour 
engagement and clicks, sometimes at 
any cost, prioritizing sensational 
content over verified information.”
“The business models of social media 
companies profit from algorithms 
that prioritize addiction, outrage and 
anxiety at the cost of public safety. 
We need strong regulatory 
frameworks to change this business 
model.”The conference looks for the participation of the 
following stakeholders :
Ministries of Information / ICT / 
Communications / Digital Transformation / 
Education
Communications / Media / Data / Privacy and 
Electoral Regulators 
Parliamentarians
Judicial Operators
Private sector, namely social media 
companies
UN family, including Office of the Tech Envoy
Regional international organizations
Civil society
Academia
Technical community (engineers and other 
technical professionals responsible for 
building the architecture of Internet) 
How you can
contribute
UNESCO is encouraging all actors involved to: 
Act as a champion for the initiative, involving 
others. 
Contribute to the conference outputs.
Mobilize funds to organize the conference 
and to ensure the conditions to implement 
the framework developed.
Use national and international networks to 
contribute to the drafting process of the 
framework.
Promote the envisioned outputs, including 
the outcome document.
For more information, contact:
Ana Cristina Ruelas, Programme Specialist
ac.ruelas@unesco.org
Rachel Pollack, Associate Programme Specialist
r.pollack@unesco.orgDigital 
platforms and
the future of
democracy
In just two decades, the Internet and social 
media have completely upended the ways in 
which we communicate, express ourselves, 
and access and share information. 
This has brought about vast new 
opportunities, but also enormous new 
challenges that current regulatory systems 
have yet to catch up with.
In the face of widespread disinformation, 
hate speech and conspiracy theories,
people are increasingly speaking about a 
reality where objective truth no longer
exists, and groups live in self-reinforcing 
informational echo chambers with entirely
different sets of facts.
These dynamics undermine processes 
critical for vibrant democracies – such as 
free, periodical and plural elections – and the 
protection and promotion of all human rights.
Significant areas of global communications 
are now under the strong influence of
a handful of digital giants whose business 
models are one of the most important
variables in the equation to maximize 
opportunities, mitigate risks and regulate
processes that might lead to concrete 
off-line harms. An advanced draft of the   
 framework is expected to be   
 produced, which will spell out   
 guidance regarding: The overarching objective of the 
conference and its lead and follow-up 
processes:
To develop, through 
multistakeholder 
consultations, a model 
regulatory framework for the 
digital platforms to secure 
information as a public good, 
while protecting freedom of 
expression and other human 
rights. (e.g., content moderation and curation, 
transparency, accountability, etc.) The issues
(regulators, co-regulation mechanisms, 
company self-regulation, 
multistakeholder regulation) The actors and the ways
(e.g., to ensure human rights’ 
accountability, advance multilingualism 
online, build digital empowerment) The purposeOur goal