1
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks
Development and Promotion
of the Right to Information
in National Frameworks
Policy Guidelines 
Published in 2023 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP
, France
© UNESCO 2023
ISBN: 978-92-3-100583-1
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-
BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not 
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.  
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are 
not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
This publication is authored by Prof. Bouchaib Bounabat Editorial Coordination: Marius Lukosiunas and Jaco du Toit Graphic design: Trigeon
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
UNESCO wishes to thank the reviewers of this publication for their insightful  
comments and suggestions: Anjali Bhardwaj, Helen Darbishire, Toby Mendel, Edetaen 
Ojo, and Magued Osman. 
This publication is supported by the 
Multi-Donor Program (MDP) on Freedom 
of Expression and Safety of Journalists.
Printed by: UNESCO
Printed in France
Typeset: Trigeon
3
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksSHORT SUMMARY
“Since wars begin in the minds of men and women it is in 
the minds of men and women that the defences of peace must be 
constructed”Right to information (RTI) constitutes a paramount pillar and an imperative requirement for human 
development considering the emergence of knowledge societies, where more and more infor -
mation is being produced, particularly by public bodies. Indeed, while exercising their activities, 
different branches of the governmental produce, receive and hold Public Sector Information and 
Data (PSID). Therefore, put at the heart of RTI, PSID disclosure and dissemination, is a real catalyst 
for good governance practices implementation, but also a prerequisite to achieve UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).
The 2022 UNESCO guidelines can be used as a framework of principles, 
strategic and regulatory approaches, and models, by policymakers and 
officials, interested in the institutionalization, the implementation 
and the assessment of PSID access process within the public bod-
ies. They also expose discussions on central issues as RTI, privacy, 
proactive disclosure, and integration of FAIR data principles in PSID 
release. Such topics may certainly be of value for civil society, inter -
national organizations, academics, and professionals, attentive to 
the ways PSID access can reinforce transparency, impact public ser -
vice delivery, and more generally be beneficial to the society.
The Guidelines focus on components necessary to any normative framework for a broader, trust -
worthy and inclusive disclosure, namely its constitutional basis, strategic levers, legal Foundations, 
and structures to support PSID requests and appeals. A set of recommendations is proposed at the 
end of these guidelines.
Guaranteeing the online space for all
136
laws adopted worldwide 
in 2022 providing legal 
guarantees for Access to 
Information5
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks
Development and Promotion  of the Right to Information 
in National  Frameworks
Policy Guidelines
6
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksAbbreviations
Introduction
 
Public Sector Information and Data Access Stakes
1.1. Defining Public Sector Information and Data
1.1.1.  General definitions and principles
1.1.2.
 Public Sector Information and Data Typology 
1.1.3.
 PSID Access Right
1.1.3.1.  Access to Information as a fundamental right
1.1.3.2.
 Principles of the Right to Information 
1.1.3.3.
 Dedicated Implementation Process and Oversight 
1.2. International Standards and Access to Information
1.2.1.  International Standards
1.2.2.
 UNESCO Guidelines for Governmental 
 
Public Domain Information Promotion
1.3. PSID Access multidimensional Role and Value 
1.3.1.  Good Governance Perspective
1.3.2.
 Social Perspective 
1.3.3.
 Cultural Perspective
1.3.4.
 Economic Perspective
1.3.5.
 Technological Impact on PSID
Table of  
contents
9
11
11
15
1811
15
19
20
21
22
231712
13
13
13
151.7
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksHow to Develop and Promote Public Access to PSID
2.1. Normative Frameworks of Access to Information
2.1.1. Constitutional Basis for PSID Disclosure and Dissemination
2.1.2. Trust as a basis for Strategic Approach to disclose PSID
2.1.3. Legal Foundations for Access as a Guiding Principle
2.1.3.1 A broader PSID Availability Scope
2.1.3.2 A broader Recognized PSID Formats Spectrum
2.1.3.3 An Inclusive PSID Disclosure and Dissemination
2.1.4. Supporting PSID Requests and Appeals
2.1.4.1 Supporting Citizens’ Requests 
2.1.4.2 Supporting Citizens’ Appeals 
2.2. Right Balance to Unlock Public Sector  
 Information and Data Potential 
2.2.1. Balancing Access to Information and Privacy
2.2.2. PSID Proactive Release Policies 
2.2.3. Respecting Intellectual Property Protection 
2.2.4. Transparency of Information  
Request Processing Algorithms  
2.3. Institutional Capacities to  
 Oversee Access to Information 
2.3.1. Oversight and Appeals Bodies 
2.3.1.1 Why an Oversight body?
2.3.1.2 Missions
2.3.1.3 Oversight Models
2.3.2. Capacity building and Reinforcement
2.3.2.1 Practices Definition and Implementation
2.3.2.2 Capacity Building
2.3.2.3 Financial Resources
2.4. PSID Resources Management 
2.4.1. Integrating FAIR Data Principles
2.4.2. Records Management and Planning 
2.4.3. Measures to Build Trust in  
Public Sector Information and Data
2.4.4. Information System Governance in a PSID Context  
Recommendations for Member States2.
3.25
4125
3629
3225
36
38
39
4029
30
31
3125
26
28
32
3526
28
353332
35
363326
29278
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks
AI
API
CC
COBIT 
CSO
FAIR
FOI
GCI F
GDP
GPDI
ICCP R
IDUAIIPP
ISO/IEC
ITIL  
NGO
ODI  
 
PSID
RTI
SDG
UNCAC
UNGA
WSISABBREVIATIONS
OECDOpen Data Institute
Organization for Economic  
Co-operation and Development
Public Sector 
Information and Data 
Right to Information
Sustainable 
Development Goals
United Nations Convention 
Against Corruption
UN General Assembly
World Summit on the 
Information Societyof Intellectual 
Property Protection
International Organization for 
Standardization International 
Electrotechnical Commission
Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library
Non-Governmental 
OrganizationArtificial Intelligence
Application 
Programming Interface
Control Objectives 
for Information and 
Related Technology
Findable, Accessible, 
Interoperable, Reusable
Government Common 
Interoperability Framework
Gross domestic product
Promotion of 
Governmental Public 
Domain Information
International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights
International Day for 
Universal Access to 
InformationFreedom of InformationCivil Society OrganizationCreative Commons
Introduction
9
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworksexpose discussions on central issues such as RTI, 
privacy, proactive disclosure, and integration of FAIR 
data principles in PSID release. Such topics may 
certainly be of value for civil society, international 
organizations, academics, and professionals, 
attentive to the ways PSID access can reinforce 
transparency, impact public service delivery, and 
more generally be beneficial to the society.
The development of the 2022 UNESCO guidelines, 
is based on a broad desk research studying how RTI 
recognition was strengthened the last two decades, 
especially trough the emergence of international 
Access to Information standards and frameworks. 
This study has also leveraged the multiple reviews 
commissioned by UNESCO to evaluate and reinforce 
the 2004 Guidelines’ content, as well as the WSIS 
workshop1 organized in April 2022, to rethink and 
discuss GPDI Policy Guidelines new version scope 
numerous. It has also drawn on relevant models 
elaborated and experiences led around the world, 
to make public sector information available openly, 
usefully and legally to citizens and to all interested 
development actors. This new version has been 
subject, throughout its development, to a continuous 
review process within dedicated group of reviewers 
composed of RTI experts. 
1 “WSIS Action Line C9: Rethinking UNESCO Policy Guidelines for 
the Development and Promotion of Governmental Public Domain 
Information” . 20 April 2022. https://www.itu.int/net4/wsis/
forum/2022/Agenda/Session/279  While exercising their activities, 
governmental bodies produce, receive 
and hold Public Sector Information and 
Data (PSID). Put at the heart of the right 
to information (RTI), PSID disclosure  
and dissemination, can constitute a  
real catalyst for good governance 
practices implementation, but also a 
prerequisite to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). 
 
It is in this context, that the 2022 UNESCO 
Guidelines are elaborated with the objective to  
make public officials, and development specialists 
aware of the importance of PSID access, and 
help them to better promote their release and 
dissemination. In this vein, these guidelines aim to 
consolidate the achievements of the 2004 UNESCO 
Guidelines for the Development and Promotion of 
Governmental Public Domain Information (GPDI), but 
also to introduce and reinforce new roles of PSID 
access in a very changing world, impelled by digital 
technologies frenetic use. 
The 2022 UNESCO guidelines on can be used as 
a framework of principles, strategic and regulatory 
approaches, and models, by policy-makers and 
officials, interested in the institutionalization, 
the implementation and the assessment of PSID 
access process within the public bodies. They also 10 Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksThe first part of these guidelines describes specific 
stakes related to PSID Access. It starts by defining 
PSID and their typology, continues by positioning their 
access at the heart of RTI, and stresses its role in 
giving  a new  boost  to GPDI promotion. PSID disclosure 
and dissemination multidimensional values, are then 
described from governance, social, cultural, economic 
perspectives. Ubiquitous and intelligent technologies’ 
Impact on PSID is discussed at the end of this part.
The second part highlights main issues to consider while 
developing and promoting PSID access, and how to address 
them. The focus is put on components necessary to any 
normative framework for a broader, trustworthy and inclusive 
disclosure, namely its constitutional basis, strategic levers, 
legal foundations, and structures to support PSID requests and 
appeals. Other directives are also proposed to ensure a serene 
and sustainable PSID disclosure, such as balancing PSID access 
and privacy, proactive release, intellectual property protection, 
and request algorithms transparency. This part describes also 
how set-up and reinforce institutional capacities to oversee 
access to information, as well as practices and directives 
necessary to manage PSID resources.
Finally, a set of recommandations is proposed at the end of 
these guidelines.
 
According to article 19 of the Universal Declaration of 
11
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksSector Information and Data (PSID) can be recorded 
and stored on different sort of physical medium,  
may it be digital or analogic. The notion of  
production includes active participation in the creation 
of data and information. It also refers to the collection of 
information or to the funding of information and data 
creation under specific contractual arrangements. In some 
cases, public authorities may produce information and 
data by outsourcing to private companies.
This definition stated, PSID can be: 
 ը related to one or several sectoral domains, such 
as social, economic, political, business, legal, 
geographical, meteorological, seismic, scientific, 
transport, environmental, cultural, touristic, patent-
related and educational areas;
 ը materialized as policy documents, national 
archives, records, and registers, minutes and 
records of meetings, ordinances and laws, judicial 
decisions, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, 
circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, 
samples, models, scientific databases, statistical 
compilations, cultural surveys, results of research 
projects and official reports;
 ը available to use in multiple ways including 
through inspection, extraction, certified analog 
and/or electronic copies, and certified samples of 
documents.
 Human Rights2, the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression “includes the freedom to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas through any media 
and regardless of frontiers”. Article 27 of the same 
Declaration provides for the “right freely to participate 
in the cultural life of the community [...] and to share 
in scientific advancement and its benefits”. Thus, one 
of the ultimate goals of any society striving for human 
development is the empowerment of all its citizens 
through the access to and the use of the relevant 
and updated information. Achieving this objective 
constitutes a paramount requirement considering the 
emergence of knowledge societies, where more and 
more information is being produced, particularly by 
governmental bodies.
Defining Public Sector Information 
and Data
1.1.1. General definitions and principles
While exercising a public task or a service of general 
interest, public authorities produce, or receive and 
hold official information and data. These Public 
2 United Nations General Assembly (1948). https://www.un.org/
en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights 
Public Sector 
Information and Data 
Access Stakes1
1.112
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworksin the environmental, meteorological, traffic 
or satellites fields, which should be made 
available immediately upon any collection  
or changes.
 ը Information of public importance, held by a public 
authority body, created or acquired in the process 
of execution of public duties defined in laws or 
other regulations, and related to everything whose 
disclosure is justified from the perspective of lawful 
interests of society.
 ը Public sector  and  private-sector data, generated or 
acquired during any joint activities between public 
and private-sector entities (e.g. public-private 
partnerships). For instance, data and information 
generated, processed, maintained or disseminated  
by the private sector, and funded by or for  
the public sector3.
 ը According to its potential economic value for a specific 
market. Public bodies may produce information 
which is either subsequently used or developed by 
the private sector with an added value, directly by the 
public sector, or through public-private partnerships. 
 
3 OCDE «  Enhancing Access to and Sharing of Data. Reconciling 
Risks and Benefits for Data Re-use across Societies” 26 Nov 2019 1.1.2. Public Sector Information  
and Data Typology 
Information produced by the public sector is not limited to 
“news” or “facts”, it can also be classified:
 ը As administrative information or non-administrative 
information. Administrative information includes 
administrative procedures, or explanations made by a  
public entity concerning its procedures, or 
other information related to governmental 
functions. Non-administrative information is 
related to the “external world”, and gathered or 
generated by public entities when performing 
their public functions (e.g. commercial, 
cultural, technical, medical, scientific, 
environmental, statistical, geographical, or 
touristic information).
 ը As data generated by a governmental department’s 
core or support activities, or produced by a decision-
making process, encompassing all relevant facts 
used while formulating policies and the rationale 
behind administrative and quasi-judicial decisions.
 ը As static slow or unchanging data, or 
dynamic data, subject to frequent or real-
time updates, such as sensor acquired data  
 
 
FIGURE 1.   Public Sector Information and Data Typology
PSID Typology Administrative/ Non 
administrative Information
Public Sector / 
Private Sector DataCore Support activities / 
Decision-making Process
Economic  
Value-Added DataInformation of  
Public ImportanceStatic / Dynamic Data
12 Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks13
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks1.1.3.2. Principles of  
the Right to Information 
PSID can, in certain cases, be restricted to public access 
and use, because of Intellectual Property Protection 
(IPP), national security, privacy, and other considerations 
explicitly mentioned and defined in laws. However, once 
these exceptions well are defined, and since access to 
information is guaranteed by the human rights framework, 
PSID disclosure and availability should be aligned 
on the Access to Information Principles (See. Box.1.),  
and protected by consistent and implemented 
legal framework.1.1.3. PSID Access Right
1.1.3.1. Access to Information  
as a fundamental right
The right of access to information (RTI) is a 
component of the fundamental right of freedom 
of expression as set forth by the Article 19 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), and 
the subsequent International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights. RTI constitutes an essential guard 
to fight mismanagement and corruption, and a 
prerequisite to achieving sustainable development 
as a whole4. It not only permits individuals and 
groups to defend their rights, but also governmental 
decision-making processes to be more trackable 
and transparent, thus improving citizen trust in public 
policies and actions.  
In this vein, and under RTI laws, any PSID set that is 
not otherwise made routinely available, can normally 
be accessed by citizens on request : 
 ը as public domain information, openly, usefully 
and legally disseminated to citizens and to  
a broad range of development actors  
(businesses, academic institutions, NGOs, 
International Agencies).
 ը through institutional websites, social networks, 
or digital devices, and also via traditional 
communication ways and spaces: mails, hard 
copy, administrative offices and centers, etc.  
RTI is an umbrella term, which is often used in the same 
way as terms such as Freedom of Information (FOI), that 
refers to the legal right to access information held by public 
bodies.
4 https://www.article19.org/resources/access-to-informa-
tion-is-critical-to-achieving-sdgs/In this perspective, RTI laws should encompass clear   
provisions that ensure: 
 ը a wide   scope of applicability, including a 
broad definition of what constitutes PSID 
accessible under the law; 
 ը the opportunity to override exemptions;  
 ը the obligation for public authorities to provide 
information proactively in online and offline 
modes; 
 ը the elaboration and implementation of time-
bound, user-friendly and decentralized 
application procedures; 
 ը the burden of proof placed on the public 
authority to justify non-disclosure; 
 ը PSID access without obliging the requester to 
disclose reasons for seeking information; 
 ը the setting-up of Independent institutions 
empowered by provisions for sanctions, to 
adjudicate violations of RTI laws. 14
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksBox.1. Principles of the Right of Access to Information5, 6, 7
1. Maximum Disclosure,  making access to 
information applicable to all public bodies, to 
the widest extent possible, and restricted only 
in very limited circumstances. Decision makers 
should always proceed from a presumption in 
favor of disclosure, without asking individuals 
to demonstrate any particular interest in the 
information or explain the reasons for the 
request.
2. Duty to Publish (Proactive Disclosure), 
obliging public bodies to disseminate widely 
information and documents of significant public 
interest, even without prior requests. One benefit 
is that publishing information will often be 
more economical than responding to multiple 
requests for the same information.
3. Processes to Facilitate Access, stating 
that requests for Information should be 
processed rapidly and fairly, and independent 
review of refusals should be available. This 
requires that simple, clear procedures be 
established to guide how public bodies deal 
with requests and how citizens can access 
information. Specific provisions should 
also be elaborated to include persons with 
disabilities, the illiterate, and populations in 
precarious situations.
4. Costs , protecting Individuals from being 
deterred to make requests for information by 
excessive costs, even if this provision does have 
a cost implication on public bodies. Preferably, 
costs should only be charged where there is a 
request for large amounts of documents, or for 
complex requests. It is also recommended for 
fee structures and schedules to be set through 
consistent and global approach, rather than be 
each public body separately.5. Right of Appeal,  allowing to have recourse 
to an independent body to review decisions 
made by public authorities. This right is 
reflected in most international standards, and 
represents a real lever to a wider information 
disclosure, especially when revealing corruption 
or incompetence. The appeals process should 
provide an avenue for enquiry and complaints 
procedure to raise issues about public entity 
publication and access decisions.
6. Limited Scope of Exceptions,  requiring 
that exceptions withholding information 
from citizens should be clear, well-founded 
in law, and narrowly defined and applied. In 
this perspective, the presumption in favor 
of disclosure means that the onus should be 
on the public body seeking to deny access 
to certain information to show that it may 
legitimately be withheld.
7. Promotion of Open Government,  
aiming at changing culture of secrecy within 
public bodies. Long term success of the right 
to information depends on public officials 
understanding that openness is not just an 
obligation, but a fundamental human right. 
Implementing this principle needs at a minimum, 
to trtain public officials, and to ensure oversight 
through annual reports providing relevant 
statistics on the functioning of the FOI laws.
8. Protection for Whistle-Blowers, who 
release information on wrongdoing against any 
legal, administrative or employment-related 
sanctions. Such protection also concerns 
individuals who, reasonably or mistakenly, but in 
good faith, disclose information in the exercise of 
any power or duty under freedom of information 
legislation. This protection provides an important 
information safety valve, and ensures key 
information disclosure.
5 ARTICLE 19. “International standards: Right to information” . https://www.article19.org/resources/international-standards-right-
information/#:~:text=The%20Right%20of%20Access%3A%20International,for%20that%20right%20in%20practice
6 ARTICLE 16. “International standards: Right to information” . https://www.article19.org/resources/international-standards-right-
information/#:~:text=The%20Right%20of%20Access%3A%20International,for%20that%20right%20in%20practice
7 County Governance Toolkit. “What are the principles of the right to access information” . https://countytoolkit.devolution.go.ke/what-are-
principles-right-access-information
14 Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks15
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks ըThe enactment in December 2005, of 
Article 10 of the United Nations Convention 
Against Corruption (UNCAC), obligating  
each State Party to take necessary measures 
to enhance transparency, including publishing 
relevant information and adopting procedures 
allowing people to obtain “information on the 
organization, functioning and decision-making 
processes of its public administration” 9.
 ըThe first binding international decision on the 
subject rendered on September 19, 2006 by the 
Inter-American Court of Human Rights in Claude 
Reyes et al v. Chile, in which the Court held  
that access to public information is a  
fundamental human right10. 
 ըThe Convention on Access to Official Documents 
(the Council of Europe), otherwise known as the 
Tromsø Convention, adopted on 18 June, 200911 
and which entered into force on 1 December, 
2020, after 10 ratifications. The Convention is 
the first legally binding international instrument 
to recognize a general right of access to official 
documents held by public authorities12.
 ըThe UN Human Rights Committee in General 
Comment, adopted in 2011, interpreted the scope 
and limits of the right to information, stating that 
Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights (ICCPR) ensures the right 
9 United Nations “United Nations Convention Against Corruption” (UNCAC) 
UN, New York, 2004. https://www.unodc.org/documents/treaties/UNCAC/
Publications/Convention/08-50026_E.pdf
10 Order of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights Case of Claude-
Reyes et al. v. Chile Judgment of September 19, 2006 (Merits, Reparations 
and Costs). https://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/casos/articulos/seriec_151_
ing.pdf 
11 “Council of Europe Convention on Access to Official Documents (CETS 
No. 205)” Tromsø 18/06/2009. https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/
full-list?module=treaty-detail&treatynum=205  
12 “The Council of Europe Convention on Access to Official Documents” 
(CETS No. 205). Tromsø Convention. 1 December 2020. https://www.coe.
int/en/web/access-to-official-documents 1.1.3.3. Dedicated Implementation 
Process and Oversight 
 RTI laws, and the induced policies, need well defined 
implementation processes, able to give practical effects 
to their provisions, mainly through the designation of 
government bodies providing information to the public. 
Implementation is important to ensure that the benefits of 
the law, policy or regulation are realized.
On the other hand, a dedicated oversight is mandatory 
to assess and enforce RTI laws implementation process. 
It is performed through a designated specific body 
charged with the supervision, monitoring, evaluation of 
performance and review, in order to ensure compliance with  
laws, regulations and policies.
1.2. International Standards  
and Access to Information 
1.2.1. International Standards 
Over the last two decades, many governments have 
become under a legally binding duty to provide citizens 
with the access to official information, arising from either 
their domestic law requirements or their international 
obligations. Moreover, the links between the access to 
information, and the ability to access other guaranteed 
rights and entitlements (human rights, constitutional 
rights) are now very clear for all the beneficiaries8. Several 
international and regional conventions, can thus be 
mentioned to illustrate such developments, among other:
8 UN Human Rights Committee (HRC), General comment no. 34, Article 19, 
Freedoms of opinion and expression, 12 September 2011, CCPR/C/GC/34 
https://www.refworld.org/docid/4ed34b562.html [accessed 13 August 
2022]  1.216
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksSustainable Development Goals. Access to information, 
implementation monitoring and reporting were 
assigned to UNESCO under Goal 1616, and more 
precisely the Target 16.10, calling on States to “Ensure 
public access to information and protect fundamental 
freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and 
international agreements”.
 ըThe Guidelines on Access to Information and 
Elections in Africa, adopted by the African 
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights 
in 2017. The Guidelines were developed 
and adopted by the Commission to provide  
guidance to African Union Member States on 
access to information in the electoral process 
as a means of strengthening democratic 
governance in Africa17. 
 ըOn 15 October 2019, the 74th UN 
General Assembly (UNGA) proclaimed 28 
September as the International Day for 
Universal Access to Information (IDUAI)18. 
This day was initially adopted by UNESCO’s 
General Conference in 2015, to raise awareness 
of the right to seek and receive information  as      
part  of  the  right  to  freedom  of  expression, and 
as key to sustainable development. Since 2016, 
UNESCO has celebrated IDUAI and highlighted 
how the right to access information is an  
enabler for the realization of all Sustainable 
Development Goals within the 2030 Agenda. 
 
16 UNESCO “From Promise to Practice: Access to Information for 
Sustainable Development” UNESCO 2020. https://en.unesco.org/sites/
default/files/unesco_report_16102.pdf 
17 African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Right “Guidelines on 
Access to Information and Elections in Africa” ACHPR. November 2017 
https://www.achpr.org/public/Document/file/English/guidelines_on_ac -
cess_to_information_and_elections_in_africa_eng.pdf
18 UNESCO “UN proclaims International Day for Universal Access to 
Information” . https://en.unesco.org/news/proclaims-international-day-
universal-access-information to access information held by public bodies. 
It requires that states proactively disseminate 
information in the public interest and ensure that 
access is “easy, prompt, effective and practical13.”
 ըThe African Charter on Values and Principles of 
Public Service and Administration, adopted by the  
African Union (AU), on 31 January, 2011, whose 
Article 6 provides inter alia that public services 
and administrations shall establish effective 
communication systems and processes to inform 
the public about service delivery, to enhance 
access to information by users, as well as to 
receive their feedback and inputs14.
 ըThe adoption of the Model Law on Access to 
Information for Africa by the African Commission 
on Human and Peoples’ Rights in 201315. The  
Model Law seeks to provide guidance for 
governments in Africa in developing or amending 
their national access to information laws to 
ensure that they meet the required standards and 
are consistent with the principles outlined by the 
Commission in the Declaration of Principles on 
Freedom Expression in Africa, which was adopted 
in 2002 and was then applicable. 
 ըThe unanimous approval, in 2015, by the UN 
General Assembly of the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, recognizing access 
to information held by governmental bodies 
as essential for public engagement across the  
 
13 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 34 Article 19: 
Freedoms of opinion and expression, (2011) http://www.refworld.org/
pdfid/4ed34b562.pdf 
14 “African Charter on Values and Principles of Public Service and 
Administration” Adopted by the 16th Ordinary Session of the of Heads 
of State and Government of the AU Addis Ababa, Ethiopia - 31st January 
2011. Entered into force on 23rd July 2016 https://au.int/en/treaties/
african-charter-values-and-principles-public-service-and-administration 
15 African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights “Model Law on 
Access to Information for Africa” ACHPR, 2013. https://www.achpr.org/
legalinstruments/detail?id=32 17
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks1.2.2. UNESCO Guidelines for Governmental 
Public Domain Information Promotion
In 2004, UNESCO elaborated and published its Policy 
Guidelines22 to help and support developing and promoting 
the production, dissemination, preservation, and use of 
Governmental Public Domain Information (GPDI) within 
developing and least developed countries, with particular 
attention to information in digital form. GPDI is defined  
as information that is publicly accessible and the 
usage of which does not infringe any national security 
restrictions, nor any legal right, nor any obligation of 
confidentiality. The UNESCO Guidelines stressed 
that any information produced by public entities 
in all branches and at all levels, should supposed 
to be in the governmental public domain, unless 
another policy option (e.g. a legal right such as an  
Intellectual Property right or personal privacy) is 
adopted and clearly documented, preventing it from 
being freely accessible to all. 
In this perspective, the 2004 version of the  
Guidelines focused on supporting governments’ 
efforts aiming to: 
 ը help guide the development of infrastructure and 
services for provision of governmental information 
to the public; 
 ը assist in fostering the production,  
archiving and dissemination of GPDI, with an 
emphasis on ensuring multicultural, multilingual 
content; and 
 ը promote access of all citizens, and especially 
disadvantaged communities, to information 
required for individual and social development. 
  
 
22 Uhlir P . F. “Policy Guidelines for the Development and Promotion of 
Governmental Public Domain Information. ” UNESCO, Paris, 2004 ըThe revision of the Declaration of Principles 
on Freedom of Expression in Africa, originally 
adopted. by the African Commission on Human 
and Peoples’ Rights in 2002, and its replacement 
with the Declaration of Principles on Freedom of 
Expression and Access to Information in Africa in 
2019 to strengthen the normative framework for 
freedom of expression and access to information 
on the continent19.
 ըIn October 2020, at its Annual Assembly, the 
Organization of American States (OAS) approved 
the Inter-American Model Law 2.0 on Access to 
Public Information20, to include thematic areas 
that require updates or further development  
in the Model Inter-American Law on  
Access to Public Information adopted 
by the OAS General Assembly in 201021. 
This policy framework incorporates best 
practices for promoting transparency and 
the right of access to information, such as  
the definitions and scope of this right, the nature 
and functions of the guarantor bodies, and  
the regime of exceptions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Right “Declaration of 
Principles on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information in Africa” 
ACHPR. Adopted by The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights 
at Its 65th Ordinary Session, held from 21 October to 10 November 2019 
in Banjul, Gambia. https://www.achpr.org/public/Document/file/English/
Declaration%20of%20Principles%20on%20Freedom%20of%20Expression_
ENG_2019.pdf 
20 http://www.oas.org/en/sla/dil/docs/publication_Inter-American_Mod-
el_Law_2_0_on_Access_to_Public_Information.pdf
21 http://www.oas.org/en/sla/dil/docs/access_to_information_Text_
edited_DDI.pdf18
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworksprecarity, integrating the poorest population, and 
crisis management, in today’s fast-changing world.  
1.3. 
1.3. PSID Access multidimensional Role 
and Value 
Governments have a critical role in leading the 
expansion of the access and use of public domain 
information. Policy makers should express their 
upmost willingness into consider the benefits  
of making PSID available. This requires an 
appreciation of the access to information  
implications for good governance, social capital 
development, and economic welfare.Since their publication, the UNESCO’s GPDI  
Guidelines have contributed to confer a heightened 
importance to public information access around the 
world. Nevertheless, these Guidelines needed to 
be updated, given all the consequential changes, at 
different levels (political, social, technological), that 
happened around the world since 2004, and where 
access to information was a real catalyst. 
It is in this perspective, that PSID is proposed  
to replace GPDI: 
 ը to consolidate what has been achieved in GPDI 
development and promotion field, but also 
 ը to introduce and/or reinforce other aspects related 
to the new role of access to PSID as a prevalent 
factor of good governance, inclusion, fighting 1.31.3
Good Governance Perspective
Transparency, Accountability, Citizen Participation
Social Perspective
Environment, well-being; Public health and safety; Education; 
Consumer Protection; Crisis Management
Cultural Perspective
A more knowledgeable population, Cultural 
Heritage Accessibility; Media Empowerment, 
R&D Development
Economic Perspective
National Data Economy; Jobs and 
Revenues Creation; Fiscal Transparency; 
Innovative Products, Services, and 
Commercial Activities.
Technological Impact
Public Information Systems, 
Artificial Intelligence, Mobile; Big 
data; Analytics; CloudFIGURE 2.  Public Sector Information and Data Typology
18 Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks19
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworksit comes to advocating marginalized and vulnerable groups 
of population.
Thus, confirming its role as a key instrument 
towards transparency, accountability, participatory 
democracy and good governance, the right to 
access is becoming widely recognized around the 
world. This is proved by the drastic increase in the 
number of countries having enacted or adopted 
binding laws and policies, that ensure the right to 
access information held by public authorities. As of 
August 2021, 132 UN Member States have adopted 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees 
for public access to information, with at least 22 
countries adopting such guarantees since the 
adoption of the 2030 Agenda in 201526. 
However, 2019 UNESCO research on the  However, 
26 UNESCO “Access to Information laws” . ©UNESCO 2022. https://www.
unesco.org/reports/access-to-information/2021/en/ati-adoption1.3.1. Good Governance Perspective
The right to access government information is 
a sine qua non   legal condition for transparency, 
accountability and citizen participation in policy 
making23. Indeed, accessing relevant PSID, allows 
citizens and other stakeholders, mainly Civil  
Society Organizations (CSOs), media, academia, 
and watchdogs’ organizations, to better  
understand governmental policies, assess  
efficiently public services, and promote democratic 
ideals, such equality, inclusion, and openness. 
With the help of RTI legal framework and PSID 
release, CSOs can also disseminate information 
on current legislations, public expenditures, 
policy implementations, achievements and 
drawbacks in the promotion of the rule of law, good 
governance, and respect for human rights, etc24. 
Moreover, in recent decades, public administrations 
have increasingly recognized that public services 
delivery requires the active contribution of multiple 
actors in the society25. In this objective, a wide 
proactive PSID disclosure and dissemination can 
enhance citizens and CSOs capabilities, in terms 
of local knowledge to co-design, co-produce 
and deliver basic services efficiently, like health, 
education and welfare, etc.
Finally, PSID availability can hugely reinforce 
CSOs role, when representing and negotiating  
for citizens’ interests vis-à-vis the Government 
during decision-making processes, particularly when 
 
23 OECD “Open Government in Latin America” OECD Public 
Governance Reviews, OECD Publishing, 2014, Paris. https://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264223639-en.
24 Centre for Good Governance “The Right to Information Act, 2005 A 
Guide for Civil Society Organizations” . CGG, under the Capacity Building 
for Access to Information Project. A Gol-UNDP Initiative. NIA. July 2006
25 OECD “Innovating the Public Sector: from Ideas to Impact” 12-13 
November 2014 OECD Conference Centre, Paris 26 UNESCO “Access to Information laws” . ©UNESCO 2022. https://www.
unesco.org/reports/access-to-information/2021/en/ati-adoption
01 14 39 85130 132Before  1950
1950 - 1990
1990 - 2000
2000 - 2010
2010 - 2020
2020 - 2021FIGURE 3.  Number of countries with Access to
                    Information legal guarantees20
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworksby World Health Organization as “infodemic”30, thus 
contributing to prevent confusion and risk-taking 
behaviors that could harm collective health, and lead 
to mistrust in health authorities. The same reasoning 
applies to concerns about environmental pollution, 
misuse of public funds, etc.
On the other hand, strong social equity  
monitoring systems are important for countries 
on the path to reducing inequalities in health,  
education, and more generally well-being, and 
achieving the human development related SDGs. 
Many of the data necessary to evaluate these 
SDGs’ indicators can come from PSID that are  
timely updated and disclosed.
The promotion of each State’s socio-educative capital is 
another reason for expanding the information commons 
through PSID disclosure, that can facilitate access to 
education and training and raise citizens’ qualification and 
skills levels. This can be achieved, for example, through the 
analysis of needs on the labor market, in order to elaborate 
targeted and relevant training programs. More specifically, 
these needs in the context of the unemployed labor 
force, will help identify those facing a higher risk of long-
term unemployment, and consequently provide them 
with adequate support: targeted trainings, professional 
retraining, etc. Public authorities have a critical role to 
play in each of these capacity-building areas, including by 
provisioning as much government-produced information 
as possible in the public domain.
30 WHO “Infodemic” definition: An  infodemic  is too much information 
including false or misleading information in digital and physical environ-
ments during a disease outbreak. https://www.who.int/health-topics/in-
fodemic#tab=tab_1  
However, 2019 UNESCO research on the 
implementation of SDG 16.1027 demonstrates 
that while there is progress in enacting right  
to information laws, governments still need to improve 
access to information laws, and better ensure their 
implementation.
1.3.2. Social Perspective 
Firstly, PSID open and unrestricted dissemination 
enables citizens to make informed decisions about 
their daily life, their environment, and their future, 
thus enhancing public health and safety, and 
therefore, the general well-being. Conversely, and  
in the absence of information, people are at risk of 
experiencing a wide range of emotions in the face  
of a crisis, or more generally any unexpected 
situations, and the anxiety or fear thus generated 
can aggravate the situation28. 
An example is the COVID-19 crisis, also designated 
as a “data-driven pandemic”, as massive amounts of 
information and data were unlocked and shared at 
an unprecedented scale. During this crisis, prompt 
information disclosure was seen as a top priority 
enabling a collective response to the pandemic29, 
helping researchers to bridge knowledge gaps  
and respond to the crisis in a timely manner. 
Information disclosure also helped also to improve 
the general public response capacity in the face of 
large amounts of disinformation, also designated 
27 UNESCO “Access to Information: A New Promise for Sustainable 
Development” UNESCO, 2019, Paris.
28 Zeng R, Zhu D. “A model and simulation of the emotional contagion 
of netizens in the process of rumor refutation.“ Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):14164
29  Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, Gao GF. “A novel coronavirus outbreak 
of global health concern. “  The Lancet.  2020 Feb;395(10223):470–473. 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30185-9. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30185-
921
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksOn the other hand, by making accessible a much 
larger amount of PSID, the more economically 
developed societies contribute in larger proportions 
to the global pool of open information potentially 
beneficial to all developing countries. Thus, PSID 
disclosure contributes to make population more 
knowledgeable, aware of the challenges it may 
face locally, nationally and globally, and therefore 
well prepared to social interactions and openness  
to the outside world.
Documentary Heritage Accessibility 
Libraries, museums, archives and other cultural 
institutions hold a significant amount of works, 
information, and data, that can be classified as PSID 
whose availability for copy and reuse can facilitate the 
spread of knowledge, and boost creative production.  
These institutions are also increasingly considering 
the potential brought by the involvement of 
volunteers (or crowdsourcing) in digitization projects, 
and particularly their contribution in collections’ 
cataloguing and providing additional support in 
interpreting documents. Moreover, releasing digital 
cultural information, data and works in compliance 
with existing national legislation, can invigorate 
creative industries, and produce economic benefits, 
mainly by providing innovative tourism services that 
build upon the local and national cultural heritage31. 
In this perspective, cultural institutions have the  
duty to be transparent about what PSID can be re-
used, and the terms and conditions on which that 
re-use can take place.
31 Natale M.T., Piccinimo M. ”Digital Cultural Heritage and Toursim Rec -
ommendations for cultural institutions” Drafted by the MiBACT working 
group for the production of recommendations on the use of digital tech-
nologies for tourism. version 1.0, 2 October 2014Finally, the growth of consumer protection laws had 
the effect to ensure consumers and shareholders 
access to financial and market information, and 
to make it harder for agencies to monopolize and 
hide information to the detriment of the public. 
Such information disclosure, can also enhance and 
consolidate the citizens’ digital experience, through 
data available on web-based networks and social 
media. This digital experience can later be matched 
with analytics systems of both: 
 ը public administrations, such as regulation authorities, 
to identify the citizen-consumer complaints in a 
proactive manner;
 ը private sector, such as market operators, 
in order to identify and propose complementary, or 
even personalized, services and products.
1.3.3. Cultural Perspective
A more knowledgeable population
Broad and open availability of PSID provides all 
citizens with means to learn about their country, 
their fellow citizens, and their government 
through information that in many cases 
would not be available from any other source.  
Moreover, information and data and more generally 
content produced by governmental bodies, are 
part of national discourse reflecting components 
for understanding the reality of everyday life, 
representing the society. Their open access will 
have a real strengthening effect in the formation of 
identity of individuals, communities, and countries. 22
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks ը address rising societal challenges efficiently and 
in a holistic manner;  
 ը promote interdisciplinary, inter-sector, inter-
institutional, and international research;
 ը enhance the quality of “on the field” and empiric-based 
research activities and open scientific enquiries, and
 ը set-up an effective academic system, mainly by 
facilitating the education of new researchers. 
 
On another hand, open science can accelerate 
progress by making research more efficient33. This 
principle can be applied to the particular case of 
publicly funded scientific data34 and the public 
domain status of openly available access and use 
of factual information. An increased and regulated  
open access to research data helps enhance quality, 
prevent unnecessary duplication of research, speed  
up scientific progress, combat scientific fraud, and it 
can overall favor economic growth and job creation35.
1.3.4. Economic Perspective
PSID release can be a real booster for national data 
economy, creating more jobs and revenues36, and 
strongly contributing to the achievement of the economic 
development SDGs (particularly SDGs: 8,9, 12)37. 
33 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. “Open 
Science by Design: Realizing a Vision for 21st Century Research” . 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 2018.  https://doi.
org/10.17226/25116 
34 Directive (EU) 2019/1024 of The European Parliament and of The Council 
of 20 June 2019, on open data and the re-use of public sector information.
35 ibid 31
36 Negreiro M. “Re-use of public sector information. Briefing-EU Legislation 
in Progress. ” European Parliamentary Research Service. July 2019. https://
www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2018/628312/EPRS_
BRI(2018)628312_EN.pdf 
37 SDGs: 8–Decent Work and Economic Growth; 9–Industry,Innovation and 
Infrastructure; 12–Responsible Consumption and ProductionMedia Empowerment
Given the rapid rise of the internet age and social 
media, there has been an increasing access to 
news and information on which media professionals 
can report, empower and inform the public and, 
where possible, use in decision-making. Therefore, 
journalism and media professionals need to acquire 
new skills in terms of responding on different 
platforms to instant delivery of information 
where inaccuracy can be easily generated32. This 
convergence of skills and increased competition, when 
everybody can become a publisher requires consequently 
an independent and comprehensive process of assessment, 
verification and analysis of collected information. One of the 
main objectives here is to prevent and also to fight all forms of  
so-called fake news, misinformation and 
disinformation, that can spread widely and rapidly, 
especially among fragile and/or unaware audience. 
RTI laws and PSID disclosure directives can support 
media to undertake this important role, as they can 
be used to access verified and reliable information, to 
diversify public sector information sources, and more 
importantly, to verify all the gathered information. 
Research and Development 
The scientific and technical research communities  
can benefit tremendously from PSID disclosure. 
Indeed, numerous factual databases as well as  
expert reports and studies, are collected by 
government entities or with government funding, 
and can be leveraged to: 
32 AFIC et al. “Right to Information in Africa Manual for Journalists” Africa 
Freedom of Information Centre (AFIC), The Federation of African Journalists 
(FAJ), Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung (FES). 2017 https://action-namibia.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/Right-to-Information-Manual-For-Journalists.pdf  23
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksIndeed, PSID can be a valuable resource for reuse as 
open data38, allowing the development of new innovative 
citizen-centric products and services, as well as innovative 
commercial activities.  In 2019, an independent assessment 
of the Open Data Institute (ODI) work on data trusts39, 
led in United Kingdom,  described how sharing data 
can create value by enabling new innovations, raising 
productivity, and increasing competition. Generally 
speaking, benefits include an increase in the usage 
of the Open Data, an expansion of its application  
to new areas, new products and services, a  
better data quality, efficiency gains for both data 
publishers and users, improved user satisfaction and 
increased trust, as well as a better image of the Open Data 
providers40.
Moreover, it is estimated that a broader adoption 
of open data ecosystems in the finance sector can 
have a  positive impact with up to  5% of GDP growth  
in developing countries41, where data sharing can  create 
20 to 50 times more value for the wider economy than the 
value it creates for data stewards42. 
38  Open Government Data (OGD), or Open Data, are datasets produced by 
public sectors, and made available in an open and machine-readable for -
mat that can be freely used, re-used and shared by anyone for any purpose.  
https://www.oecd.org/gov/digital-government/open-government-data.
htm
39 https://theodi.org/article/data-trusts-economics-report/ 
40 OECD (2017), Government at a Glance 2017. Available at http://www.
oecd.org/gov/government-at-a-glance-22214399.html 
41 McKinsey (2021),  Financial data unbound: the value of open data for 
individuals and institutions. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/finan-
cial-services/our-insights/financial-data-unbound-the-value-of-open-da-
ta-for-individuals-and-institutions  
42 OECD (2019), Enhancing Access to and Sharing of Data. https://www.
oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/enhancing-access-to-and-
sharing-of-data_276aaca8-en;jsessionid=tiWLS6REUQH5Jw0sMA6T5unp.
ip-10-240-5-57 In  this vein, recent research confirms that fiscal transparency, 
in particular during the budget execution phase,  
has a strong positive impact on attracting foreign direct 
investment  inflows-and this is even more true for non-
OECD countries43, In the United Kingdom, it is estimated 
that knowledge assets in the public sector could generate 
£5 billion financial, economic, and social benefits per year 
at least44.  
Finally, open data development will also allow for mixing 
public data assets with data produced by other public 
bodies, private sector, civil society and citizens, thus 
promoting transparency, participation, and social inclusion 
in service delivery45. 
1.3.5. Technological Impact on PSID
In addition to their traditional information systems  
in analog or digital forms, public agencies 
increasingly use the newest digital technologies, 
namely Artificial Intelligence (AI), mobile, Big  
data, analytics and cloud to boost operational efficiency 
and to enhance their response to their “customers” 
(citizens, enterprises, partners) needs. Ubiquitous 
connectivity, strong mobility, intuitive and user-friendly 
interfaces and new transactions channels, look beyond 
the classical governmental services available online and/
or through mobile devices. These technologies raise bigger 
challenges of an open and equitable access for all citizens  
to the knowledge and benefits to be derived from the 
resulting important expansions of PSID. 
43 Cicatiello, L. et al. (2021), “Assessing the impact of fiscal transparency on 
FDI inflows” , Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, Vol. 73, p. 100892, http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.2020.100892. 
44 HM Treasury (2018), “Getting smart about intellectual property and 
other intangibles in the public sector: Budget 2018” Crown copyright 2018
45 OECD “Policy Shaping and Policy Making: The Governance of Inclusive 
Growth”© OECD, 2015. https://www.oecd.org/governance/ministerial/the-
governance-of-inclusive-growth.pdf States should deal with this issue by considering the potential 
impact of unprecedented data transactions on democracy, 
human rights (which overlap with other ethical concerns) and 
the rule of law, as well as its influence on individual behavior  
and thought46. Therefore, Governments need to update and 
enforce data protection regulations, to mitigate risks to human 
rights posed by AI, particularly machine learning, and more 
specifically against forms of “illegitimate interference” , including 
forms of persuasion and data intrusion that compromise 
democratic principles47. Governments should also promote 
policies that create a diverse and pluralistic information 
environment, including the regulation of technology 
monopolies in the domain of AI48. They can, in this objective, 
build upon the UNESCO AI and Ethics Recommendation49 
aiming, among other goals, to : 
 ը provide a universal framework of values, principles 
and actions to guide States in the formulation of their 
legislation, policies or other instruments regarding AI, 
consistent with international law; 
 ը protect, promote and respect human rights and  
fundamental freedoms, human dignity and  
equality, including gender equality; and 
 ը promote equitable access to developments and knowledge 
in the field of AI and the sharing of benefits.
 
 
46 E. Danescu “Democracy, Freedom and Truth at a Time of Digital Disruption: 
An Equation with Three Unknowns?” Open Access Book “Fake News Is Bad 
News - Hoaxes, Half-truths and the Nature of Today’s Journalism’ IntecOpen. 
August 20th, 2021.
47 ibid 44.
48 EESC. Artificial Intelligence – The Consequences of Artificial Intelligence on 
the Digital) Single Market, Production, Consumption, Employment and Society, 
European Economic and Social Committee: Brussels; 2017. https://www.eesc.
europa.eu/en/our-work/opinions-inf  
49 UNESCO “Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence”. Adopted 
by UNESCO’s General Conference at its 41st session, on 24 November 2021: 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381137 
24 Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks
25
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks
How to Develop and 
Promote Public Access 
to PSID2
 ըconfirming the supremacy RTI as constitutional 
right in case of conflicting with other laws,
 ըenforcing and expanding individual guarantees 
to request and obtain governmental information, 
through if necessary the supports of courts and 
appeal bodies.
2.1.2. Trust as a basis for Strategic Approach to 
disclose PSID
Over the years, more and more countries have put  
in place a range of adequate PSID disclosure strategies 
and policies. Nevertheless, a range of barriers have 
caused progress in governmental data release and use to 
be relatively slow, particularly, privacy risks, complexity 
or incompleteness of legislative framework applied to 
data, and lack of a coordinated approach to data sharing 
initiatives. 
To enable better use and sharing of data and information, 
governments should be mindful of citizens and users’ 
expectations and preferences, and consequently, engage 
adequate strategies and action plans to release and 
disseminate their PSID assets in serene and secure ways.
These strategies should be based on increasing 
trust, through a greater participation of citizens 
in the realization of the benefits that better use of 
PSID can offer. These strategies should be based on 
an increasing trust, by implementing and applying 
risk management practices to maintain confidence 
in how data is handled, making citizen confident in 2.1. Normative Frameworks of Access to 
Information 
2.1.1. Constitutional Basis for PSID Disclosure 
and Dissemination 
RTI is increasingly perceived as one of the defining aspects 
of any rule of law society, and a central condition to the 
exercise of procedural political and human rights. Moreover, 
transparency is vital to government agencies’ oversight, 
and therefore, represents an additional justification of the 
right to information. On another hand, PSID held by public 
authorities can be considered, as the property of citizens, 
and as such, these lasts are meant, in a constitutional way, 
to enjoy free access to it, except when their interests are 
threatened.
All these justifications can explain why since the 1990s and 
around the world, numerous new or amended constitutions 
have enshrined RTI, thus enhancing PSID release and 
dissemination. Governments should reinforce this dynamic,  
through continuous measures, aiming at:
 ըproviding for and/or reinforcing this right in their 
constitutions, or at least making it be inferred from 
the constitutional right of expression freedom,
 ըgiving effect to RTI as constitutional right, by 
supporting it through adequate enabling legal 
system (laws, provisions, decrees, etc.), 
 ըmaking sure that this constitutional right is not or 
cannot be countermanded by other laws,2.126
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksThus, PSID availability scope should be considered 
in a broad framework, mainly in terms of application 
of free of charge openness and legal access and re -
use, to all public information and documents collect -
ed or produced:
 ըby public institutions at national level, but 
also at local level. Indeed, municipalities, their 
elected representatives and civil servants, 
represent the first interface between citizens 
and the State, and thus have a crucial role in 
fostering and sustaining trust-building and 
participatory decision-making through the 
dissemination of their PSID,
 ըwithin the exercise of a public task, a service 
of general interest, or decision-making 
processes, encompassing all relevant facts 
relied on while formulating policies or the 
reasons for administrative and judicial 
actions or decisions,
 ըthrough public funds, and/or as part of partnerships 
with the private sector, especially in social domains 
(e.g. public-private partnership projects in domains 
such public health services, water supplies, 
sanitation, disasters and pandemics management, 
etc.), with NGOs or intergovernmental organizations.
2.1.3.2 A broader Recognized PSID 
Formats Spectrum
Governments should recognize and integrate the legal value 
and the authenticity of any format holding public information 
(See Section 1.1.1. General definitions and principles), and of 
any the medium (paper, or electronic form or as a sound, 
visual or audiovisual recording, etc.), as well as all means, 
ways and media to collect and disseminate PSID, be they: the way their data remains secure, accessible and 
used for positive purposes, and ensuring greater 
participation of citizens in the realization of the 
benefits that better use of PSID can offer.
Furthermore, a clearer operating environment should 
be set-up to retain data and information custodians 
trust, by giving them permission for the safe release 
of data/information, and adequate support to share 
and release data/information, especially when such 
disclosure incurs substantial costs not covered by 
operational budgets. 
In this vein, governments should promote release 
of large volumes of data and information in  
formats and under conditions that permit their 
leveraging and reuse. This requires to engage all  
the measures necessary to protect both public 
interest and personal data, and also to profit from 
economic benefits induced by such open data 
dissemination and use.
2.1.3. Legal Foundations for  
Access as a Guiding Principle
2.1.3.1 A broader PSID  
Availability Scope
The right of citizens to access governmental information 
should be guaranteed through the national Constitution, 
legally founded and operationalized by an RTI Act precising 
how this right can be exercised. In this perspective, RTI laws 
should apply to government documents and information, 
accordingly to the Access to Information Principles (See. 
Box.1.), making them available to anyone, whether or not 
they are citizens from the country in question, and whether 
or not they formulate the reason behind the need to access 
to this information.  27
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks ըthe eventual actions to take if such use comes 
to light, and how to assess the necessity to 
maintain the concerned records and make 
them available for public disclosure as per the 
prevailing statutes in the country.
2.1.3.3 An Inclusive PSID  
Disclosure and Dissemination
Specific legal provisions should ensure that 
access strategies to PSID involve all fragile 
populations, namely the  elderly, racial and ethnic  
minorities, people with disabilities, rural populations 
and apply a gender lens. Opportunities should also 
be provided for   digitally low-skilled or illiterate 
persons, and those of low socio-economic status. 
PSID open access and use would empower these 
disadvantaged populations to exercise their rights 
and to hold governments to account. 
In this objective, public Information must especially 
be accessible to women in developing countries, 
particularly in rural areas, where a large percentage 
doesn’t even have basic smartphones to access 
the Internet. PSID must also be produced and 
disseminated in appropriate formats, meeting, 
among others, the special needs of people with 
physical disabilities. 
Furthermore, all forms of linguistic segregation 
should be avoided in providing access to public 
information. It is necessary to legally allow 
public bodies to use technologies facilitating 
information access and exploitation, especially  ըtraditional analogue media as paper, radio, 
public announcements, local community 
centers, libraries, etc., 
 ըcountry’s significant traditional modes of 
communication, or 
 ըdigital devices and technologies for the 
storage, processing and/or exchange of 
public information in structured or semi-
structured formats, using online and offline 
modes, via social networks, voice messages, 
or SMS, or through formal or private emails.  
Concurrently, it is very important to provide information 
on the internet and in a digital format, but without 
keeping this access restricted to electronic formats, as 
a very vast majority of people in developing countries 
are not connected yet. In this perspective, a change to 
electronic dissemination, particularly as the sole mean of 
disseminating the information product, should not impose 
undue acquisition or training costs on users.
Finally, using personal email for public purposes would 
deprive RTI laws of its essential content. Therefore, specific 
articles of law should be drafted to address issues related 
to: 
 ըthe use of private communication services 
(private email, instant messages apps, social 
networks, etc.) for conducting government 
business, thus circumventing public scrutiny 
and disclosure; and 28
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks2.1.4. Supporting PSID  
Requests and Appeals 
2.1.4.1. Supporting  
Citizens’ Requests 
All public bodies should have a responsibility in 
providing PSID to the public that must be consistent 
with their legislative and regulatory missions. They 
should fulfil this responsibility primarily by providing 
a clear classification of governmental information to 
disseminate, even if no categorization system can be 
perfect. All governmental bodies should also provide 
information describing their organization, activities, 
programs, meetings, systems of records, and other 
information holdings, and how the public may obtain 
access to their information resources.
Secondly, public authority that has been requested to give 
access to an item of information should not control the 
particular interest the requestor has in accessing it. Thus, 
people should not be asked to prove why they need the 
information, or to give reasons for accessing or seeking 
information. This is particularly relevant in cases where 
citizens face complex or heavy administrative processes.
Moreover, if the information is not directly accessible 
through a digital means, the public authority allowing 
or denying access should be required to take its decision 
in a specified period, and the reasons for denying access 
should be sufficiently detailed, so that the requestor can 
determine the basis for an appeal of the decision.innovative Machine Translation tools and online 
dictionaries. Such tools can contribute to linguistic 
integration, and make all languages usable for the  
production and consumption of both local and 
national public information.
Finally, improperly restrictive practices such as 
avoiding the dissemination and use of public 
information should be prevented, in compliance with 
the legal statutory in place, particularly practices 
to establish or permit others to establish on the 
government behalf:
 ըexclusive, restricted, or other distribution 
arrangements that hinder the availability of PSID 
dissemination products on a timely and equitable 
basis.
 ըrestrictions or regulations, including the charging 
of fees or royalties, on the reuse, resale, or re-
dissemination of public information products by 
the public.
 ըcharges for information dissemination products at a 
level higher than what is sufficient to recover the cost of  
dissemination (i.e. the marginal cost of fulfilling a user 
request). 
 
 
 
 29
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks2.2. Right Balance to Unlock  
Public Sector Information  
and Data Potential 
2.2.1. Balancing Access  
to Information and Privacy
There may be interests that justify the withholding of 
certain governmental information, such as protecting 
individuals’ privacy, safeguarding a country’s intelligence 
and national security secrets, avoiding prejudicing a 
criminal investigation, and/or protecting a commercial 
confidence or private proprietary information. It should be 
noted that:
 ըProvisions that restrict access to protected 
information are frequently enforced by the 
use of criminal penalties. 
 ըThere is a strong connection between the right to 
access to information and the right to privacy52. 
They should be considered as complementary 
rights53, but also as conflicting ones54,55.
 
 
 
 
52 UDHR, art 12; ICCPR, art 17; International Convention on the Protection 
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 1990, 
art 14; Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), art 16; American 
Convention of Human Rights (ACHR), art 11.2, European Convention 
on Human Rights (ECHR), art 8; African Charter on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights; Arab Charter on Human Rights arts 16 and 8.
53 UNESCO “Guidelines for Judicial Actors on Privacy and Data Protection” 
UNESCO, 2022.
54 Ayoubi L. “Mapping the Evolving Interface of Access to Information and 
Privacy: Issue Brief” UNESCO 2021
55 The case of public interest is very expressive at this level. Indeed, on the 
one hand, public interest can prevent the disclosure of information when 
doing so would be against this interest. On the other hand, public interest 
can override other grounds for refusal of an access to information request, 
for instance on the basis of protection of privacy.Finally, appropriate assessment instruments should be set-
up to measure progress made in the fulfilment by the state 
of its duty to guarantee PSID access, mainly to which level: 
 ը The public is entitled to request access to PSID; 
 ը governmental bodies respond to such requests 
in a timely fashion; and 
 ը PSID is put into the public domain proactively.
2.1.4.2. Supporting Citizens’ Appeals 
Appeals normally involve requests to reconsider 
failures by duty-bearers to provide information.  
Ideally, an independent and impartial review body, that 
can be also an independent information commissioner or 
ombudsman50 needs to be established in order to handle 
appeals of decisions denying access to the information. 
The process by which this body powers are asked to 
intervene has to be clearly stated and must be performed  
on a reasonably expeditious basis and be 
sufficiently transparent. 
Ombudsmen are usually invested of weaker investigation 
powers, but they have the advantage of setting-up less 
conflictual relations between the public body and the PSID 
requester, relying more on resolution through persuasion 
and dialogue, potentially leading to greater compliance51. 
Finally, it is to Governments to define whether decisions 
and/or recommendations emitted by these bridged powers 
are binding or not. Governments have also to establish 
adequate mechanisms for a final review of access denials. 
Appeals to a court should normally be a last resort once 
institutional appeal processes are exhausted.
50 Operational at the federal level in Canada, Hungary, Sweden, 
Australia, Spain and New Zealand. Udombana, N. J., & Quadri, K. M. 
(2020). Institutional Framework on the Right to Information in Selected 
Jurisdictions. Beijing Law Review, 11, 244-261. https://doi.org/10.4236/
blr.2020.111017 
51 Udombana, N. J., & Quadri, K. M. (2020). Institutional Framework on the 
Right to Information in Selected Jurisdictions. Beijing Law Review, 11, 244-
261. https://doi.org/10.4236/blr.2020.111017 2.230
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks2.2.2. PSID Proactive Release Policies 
The proactive disclosure consists in making information 
public at the initiative of the public body, without a request 
being filed. It results in proactive transparency confirming 
the public’s right to be informed, but also the government’s 
will to inform the public of laws and decisions57. 
In this perspective, Governments should lead rigorous, 
objective, and balanced analysis, to assess if there is a 
potential harm or risk, on the state, on the state, society or 
particular persons, in proactively disclosing or at least on-
request releasing, a specific set of PSID. Such assessment 
should be “harm test” oriented, and generally comprising 
the following three phases58, that check: 
I whether there is a foreseeable harm to the 
government, society or particular citizens, legal 
persons or other organizations in proactively 
disclosing or at least on-request releasing the 
information; and then 
II if there may be such a harm, whether it 
can be clearly articulated and supported 
by] facts — not just speculation or general  
fears; and finally
III if parts (I) and (II)  are met, whether there nonetheless 
is an overriding benefit to society, or “public-good 
test”, as a whole, in the targeted information proactive 
disclosure, or at least its “on-request” release. 
 
 
57 Darbishire H. “Proactive Transparency: The future of the right to 
information?” World Bank. Access to Information Program. Governance 
Working paper series. 2010
58 Pearlman M.W. “Proactive Disclosure of Government Information. 
Principles and Practice” . Copyright © 2017-2022 National Freedom of 
Information Coalition.   https://www.nfoic.org/proactive-disclosure-of-
government-information/ The case of public interest is very expressive at this level. 
Indeed, on the one hand, public interest can prevent the 
disclosure of information when doing so would be against 
this interest. On the other hand, public interest can override 
other grounds for refusal of an access to information 
request, for instance on the basis of protection of privacy.
To address efficiently such contradictory situations, 
exceptions to the principle of availability should be 
carefully balanced, and public information withholding 
mitigated, whenever it is necessary and legally possible. 
Thus, while some exceptions preventing citizens from 
accessing public information are mandatory by law, due 
to the level of confidentiality of the targeted information, 
other discretionary exemptions to disclosure should 
be specifically justified and interpreted as narrowly as 
possible in order to avoid adding unnecessary secrecy over 
governmental information. 
Moreover, any classification regime, based on legal 
procedures and principles, especially when it comes 
to national security restrictions, must also include a 
declassification schedule that establishes a timetable for 
placing previously restricted information in the public 
domain.
Therefore, if a government has already adopted personal 
data protection legislation, this legislation and the RTI 
law should be mutually consistent, with the possibility, if 
any inconsistencies are identified, to ensure an overriding 
option of the RTI law over the other laws and policies.
On another hand, the use of Data sanitization 
techniques, such as data anonymization56, should  
be recommended in order to enlarge the scope of PSID 
access for a maximum public information disclosure 
without violating any laws or decrees requiring data 
privacy.
56 IIAP definition: “Anonymization: The process in which individually 
identifiable data is altered in such a way that it no longer can be related 
back to a given individual” . https://iapp.org/resources/glossary/#abstract 31
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks2.2.4. Transparency of Information Request 
Processing Algorithms  
Focus is increasingly put on the transparency of 
algorithms incorporated into public systems, and used to 
make decisions, in vital domains as transport, health and 
policing62. The rationale for such trends is that algorithms 
become more and more autonomous and invisible, able to 
introduce inadvertent biases, favor a political orientation 
or reinforce undesirable practices63. 
Therefore, in order to anchor and consolidate values of 
impartiality, and accountability when it comes to disclose and 
disseminate PSID, governments should implement legal and 
technical measures to ensure the transparency of algorithms 
used to process information requests. Such measures are 
related to the setting-up of relevant mechanisms, practices, 
and instruments, guaranteeing timely responses to critical 
questions concerning these algorithms: how were they 
developed, or acquired, by whom, and for what purpose/s? 
How do they actually work (logic to proceed and data to 
train)?
Government should also take adequate measures 
to ensure a full recognition of these algorithms, 
and particularly through the accessibility to  
their proprietary code or training data, that can 
be potentially prevented by Intellectual property 
rights. Tools and models such UNESCO Digital 
Transformation & AI Competency Framework  
(See Box.2. below), should be leveraged in  
this perspective.
these sites provide free access to all of Australia’s census data, official 
geoscientific information and knowledge, and other miscellaneous 
government data.
62 Fink, K. “Opening the government’s black boxes: freedom of information 
and algorithmic accountability. ” Information Communication and Society, 
v. 21, n. 10, p. 1453-1471, 2018.
63 Janssen M., KUK G. “The challenges and limits of big data algorithms in 
technocratic governance” . Government Information Quarterly, v. 33, n. 3, 
p. 371-377, 2016.Governments should also establish effective 
mechanisms for individuals and groups enabling 
them to request information that have not been 
proactively disclosed, and in case there is a relatively 
large number of individuals requesting a specific 
information, have it proactively disclosed.  
2.2.3. Respecting Intellectual  
Property Protection 
The application of any obligation induced by PSID 
disclosure, is dependent of its compliance to international 
arrangements and treaties on intellectual property rights 
protection59. Thus, it should neither affect the existence or 
ownership of intellectual property rights, nor limit in any 
way their exercise. However, public bodies have the duty 
to: 
 ը exercise their copyright and intellectual property 
rights related to the management of data and 
information, in a way that facilitates re-use and 
interoperability;
 ը provide potential beneficiaries (groups and 
individuals) with all necessary indications, giving 
them more certainty about their rights and 
responsibilities, when accessing to PSID. 
In this sense, it should be noted that Creative Commons60 
(CC) can give all public bodies a standardized way to grant 
the public permission to use their PSID, under copyright 
law. Once granted and applied, these licenses can hugely 
promote citizen engagement, stimulate economic growth  
and increase the transparency of government resources 
and services61.
59 Among others: the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT), the Agreement on 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), 
and the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works 
(Berne Convention).
60 Creative Commons licenses give everyone from individual creators to 
large institutions a standardized way to grant the public permission to use 
their creative work under copyright law. https://creativecommons.org/
about/cclicenses/
61 Three of the largest sources of Australian government data sets—
the  Australian Bureau of Statistics,  Geoscience Australia  and  data.gov.
au—are available by default under a  CC Attribution license. Together 32
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksBox 2. Digital Transformation &  AI Competency Framework64 
UNESCO has developed a “Digital Transformation & AI Competency Framework” that identifies  
three core competency areas for civil servants for digital governance and transformation:
2. Data use and governance  
combination of skills and attitudes  
allowing civil servants to understand  
the fundamental role and value of 
data and its inherent risks but also the 
ability to use, analyse and share it taking 
into consideration ethical, privacy and  
security concerns. This category of 
competencies is fundamental for civil 
servants to be able to address today’s 
challenges and meet citizens’ growing 
expectations while at the same time use 
data effectively and responsibly.1. Digital Planning and Design  
combination of skills and attitudes allowing 
civil servants to understand the complexity 
of today’s problems, anticipate unexpected 
events and recognize strategic opportunities 
to use digital solutions to develop strategies 
and vision. This category of competencies 
also includes the understanding of 
digital leadership and the ability to lay 
the foundations for digital teams to work 
effectively;3. Management and Execution for 
Digital  combination of skills and attitudes 
allowing civil servants to understand 
new and innovative practices on project 
management and collaboration. This 
involves the ability to apply a new set of 
working methods, approaches, and tools 
to use data and technology to address 
complex problems and to engage citizens 
by fostering new modalities for civic 
participation.
64 The Competency Framework was developed through a multi-stakeholder leadership model, that assessed human capacity needs for 
digital transformation in the public sector, paying particular attention to the Global South perspective. This process included 4 regional 
consultations in Southeast Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean. Complemented by a series of interviews with regional policymakers 
and the collection and assessment of good practices globally, the Working Group launched a “Digital Transformation & AI Competency 
Framework” for public sector duty bearers on 18 September 2022 at a side event of the 77th Session of the UN General Assembly (UNGA 77).
32In this context, an oversight body is needed to ensure 
consistency and harmonization between legal instruments, 
heterogenous technical components, different 
administration processes and public services. This structure 
is mandatory to guarantee the adequate governance to 
such transverse initiatives involving multiple departments. 
In this regard, UNESCO’s survey on SDG indicator 
16.10.265 confirms oversight and appeal bodies as 
essential components of Access to Information laws  
 
 
 
 
65 UNESCO “Access to Information: A New Promise for Sustainable 
Development” UNESCO, 2019, Paris.2.3. Institutional Capacities to Oversee 
Access to Information 
2.3.1. Oversight and Appeals Bodies 
2.3.1.1. Why an Oversight body?
PSID access and dissemination process are expected to 
be enhanced, but also disrupted, by legislations changes, 
citizens’ needs, the public administrations organization, 
and the rapid evolution of technologies. Moreover, public 
bodies function often independently from each other. They 
manage their own data and processes, and consequently 
often have different predispositions to collaborate to make 
their informational assets available.2.3
33
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworksresolutions, and recommendations for appropriate 
sanctions when noncompliance is proved. Indeed, 
delays and cost, added to a deficiency of trust in 
legal capacity and administrative procedures, may 
lead to a reject to pursue appeals through the courts. 
Therefore, the existence of such enforcement body 
can open another possibility of appeal outside the 
public administration or the courts. Its main objective 
consists in resolving disputes between public 
administration holding PSID and requesters for 
official decision review or for a decision to be made.  
 ը Auditing missions, responding to the recurrent 
needs of periodic independent controls and 
compliance reviews of the access to public 
information policies and laws and their 
effective implementation. Thus, the oversight 
body should be able to conduct impartial and 
objective diagnostic on information regimes, to 
detect challenges and bottlenecks that induce 
deep inconsistencies between the prevailing 
information management practices and the 
information access laws.
2.3.1.3. Oversight Models 
It is important to consider the most effective 
placement of the oversight body in terms of where 
real authority rests in the country context. Thus, the 
oversight body can be:  
 ըtook in charge by an independent body that 
eventually performs other functions, such 
an Ombudsman or Mediator, an Information 
Commissioner, or a dedicated commission  
or institution;68
 
 
 
68 OECD “Chapter1. Oversight bodies for access to information” . https://
www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/66afaf07-en/index.html?itemId=/content/
component/66afaf07-enenforcement, due to their statutes as specialized focused 
entities. This report highlights also oversight body’s 
important role in leading proactive disclosure practices, 
and balancing access to information and privacy human 
rights66.
2.3.1.2. Missions
The targeted oversight body should be in charge of:
 ը Steering tasks including management of nationwide 
implementation of any framework or initiative aiming 
at disclosing and disseminating PSID, as well as all 
arrangements of related policies at the national 
and local levels. Referred to as an integrating and 
coordinating authority, this body has to support public 
agencies in setting up appropriate organizational 
structures and administrative procedures that  
facilitate compliance with RTI law, and 
obligations induced by PSID dissemination. 
To achieve the objectives the oversight body 
should preferably be: 
- Based on strong legal foundations 
that are necessary for existence  
and legitimacy.
- Placed within a national champion,  
when it comes to leading RTI implementation, 
public information disclosure initiatives or 
reform administration67.
 ը Application responsibilities that include 
hearing of appeals, investigation of 
complaints, issuance of eventual binding  
 
 
 
 
66 UN “The Age of Digital Interdependence. ” Report of the UN Secre -
tary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation, 2018, Page 31. 
https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/DigitalCooperation-report-for%20web.pdf
67 In several countries with the highest RTI scores, the nodal responsibility 
rests with an agency responsible for public administration. Lemieux 
V. L. and Trapnell S. E. “Public Access to Information for Development A 
Guide to the Effective Implementation of Right to Information Laws” . 2016 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.34
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks ըOversight body capacities’ strengthening:  
It is important to guarantee the necessary powers 
and capabilities to the oversight body, in order 
to ensure that citizens have access to public 
information in a proper timeframe, and that no one 
is left behind. Therefore, and regardless of the 
institutional arrangements, the oversight body 
should be given adequate financial resources, 
and detain sufficient authority within government, 
so that it can fully play its key role while 
maintaining its independence and impartiality. 
 ըPublic Agencies involvement: The oversight body should 
be backed by a network of nodal structures (e.g. Chief 
information officer, mediator) deployed in each major 
government agency and department, to supervise 
the implementation of PSID disclosure policy within 
this public body. While developing and monitoring 
internal organizational information policies and 
procedures, each nodal structure will ensure that the 
information policies, principles, standards, guidelines, 
rules, and regulations prescribed by the overarching 
national policy are implemented appropriately. 
 ըLocal public bodies involvement: The national 
government should take the lead in organizing access 
and dissemination of public information at the national 
level, but the role and importance of contribution and 
participation of sub-national or local public authorities 
must not be underestimated in this field. Decisions made 
by institutions at the local level, in the nearest surroundings 
of citizens, have a tangible impact on their daily life.  
  ըcentralized within a public body such as the 
justice ministry, the department responsible 
for public administration, or a public agency 
or commission responsible of Data Protection 
and Privacy, or in charge of human rights; or
 ըdecentralized across two or more agencies or 
governmental departments.
There are also opportunities for external actors to reinforce 
the importance of monitoring and capabilities. It is the case 
of:
 ըRegional instruments69, by functioning as legal 
watchdogs, providing targeted guidance to 
countries about strengths and weaknesses in 
their RTI systems, and encouraging governments 
to adopt specific practices to improve the RTI 
implementation process
 ըCSOs70, by engaging in monitoring of 
implementation processes at the local level to 
encourage governments to better understand 
how RTI is functioning in practice, sometimes by 
conducting compliance testing on the rates and 
quality of information request processing .
Finally, three guidelines are essential to set-up a 
comprehensive and effective oversight body:
69 Among others: The African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights; 
The Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression, under 
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights; The Inter-American 
Court of Human Rights; The European Court of Human Rights; The ASEAN 
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights.
70 e.g. Local organizations such as the Africa Freedom of Information 
Centre have contributed in shadow reporting to put pressure on states.35
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks2.3.2.2. Capacity Building
Effective PSID disclosure and dissemination, needs a real 
awareness from public administrations and civil society on 
the importance of these data release, a solid knowledge 
and capabilities on how to implement the related legal 
frameworks, particularly when it comes to ensure the 
necessary balance between RTI laws and privacy, and 
technical skills that are essential to leverage disclosed data 
sets to create innovative products and services . 
Thus, to ensure that public sector bodies are ready 
to disclose their data, they should:
 ըEngage a compulsory training about RTI laws and in 
particular PSID dissemination, to enable the personnel 
in charge of releasing public information, as well as 
civil society actors, attaining a high level of judicial and 
technical abilities necessary to disclose information in 
response to public requests.
 ըIncorporate PSID dissemination dedicated 
training into local or central public bodies 
education programs, as a major mean  
to comply with legal obligations for  
information disclosure.
 ըOrganize trainings for the institutions with 
the most demanded data sets (including local 
administrations) to improve their knowledge about 
PSID, Open Data and their benefits71.
 ըPlan and perform awareness campaigns 
on the importance of PSID disclosure and 
dissemination, the related legal framework 
and existing procedures, such how to  
identify required PSID, and to make  
requests, or go to appeal.
71 Lithuanian National Audit Office “Whether Disclosure of the Public 
Sector Data is Ensured” . Executive summary of the public audit report. 29 
November 2016, No. VA-P-900-1-252.3.2.   Capacity building and Reinforcement
Legal frameworks are necessary but should not be 
considered as sufficient conditions for accessing 
information. The institutional framework needs to 
be conducive, the ecosystem supportive, and the 
stakeholders engaged in all steps of the process. 
Both the demand and the supply sides need to be 
considered. Therefore, it is essential to reinforce 
institutional capacities that are referring to practices’ 
formalization, capacity building and Financial 
Resources, which are necessary for an effective 
implementation of a PSID dissemination process.
2.3.2.1. Practices Definition  
and Implementation
RTI system backbone is formed by practices 
related to information request processing, records 
management, and proactive disclosure. Any 
discretionary applications for these practices should 
be prevented, mainly through their definition and 
elaboration, as internal procedures, directives 
and organizational arrangements, based on RTI 
laws’ obligations, and particularly on targeted PSID 
disclosure and dissemination policy. 
These formalized practices should be implemented 
and generalized to all public bodies, thus ensuring 
will ensure the regulatory compliance of the 
basic functions of collecting, managing and  
communicating public information, from RTI law  
and PSID access perspectives.2.436
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworksalready looking into monetizing data from connected 
assets as a way to supplement revenue from taxes75.
2.4. PSID Resources  
Management 
The success of any implementation framework for PSID 
disclosure is based on how public information assets 
are assessed, managed, and exploited to meet the 
needs and interests of users both internal and external 
to government. Achieving this objective requires the 
integration of strong principles to manage data velocity 
and complexity, a professional planning of information 
resource management, a proactive management of IT 
Impact on PSID Dissemination, and the reinforcement of 
trust-building practices.
2.4.1. Integrating FAIR Data Principles
PSID sharing can promote transparency, encourage 
collaboration and participation, and drive better decision-
making, especially in response to emergencies such 
as outbreaks of infectious diseases or disaster crisis. 
Nevertheless, the continuously growing amount of data, 
added to the will to exploit it in the best possible way, 
induce several other issues to tackle, mostly related to 
the data governance, reuse, aggregation, combination 
and exchange across different sectors. In this perspective, 
and to deal more efficiently with data increase in volume, 
complexity, and creation speed of data, governments 
will surely benefit from adopting and applying well-
established guidelines, such as FAIR (Findable, Accessible, 
Interoperable, Reusable) Data Principles (See Box.3. below).
 
75 The North Texas Innovation Alliance is researching how member cities 
and counties can monetize data to boost revenue. Source : GCN “Can cities 
monetize their data?”  November 10, 2021 https://gcn.com/data-analyt -
ics/2021/11/can-cities-monetize-their-data/316288/ 2.3.2.3. Financial Resources
Effective functioning of RTI systems, and consequently PSID 
disclosure policies, require sustainable financial resources 
to identify, process, classify and disseminate requested 
public domain information. Indeed, any breakdown in 
the supply of adequate resources dedicated to public 
information circulation, especially in agencies that receive 
large volumes of requests, can rapidly harm both social 
engagement and economic growth. 
Therefore, governments should establish an institutional 
incentive system to:
 ը encourage public bodies to assign greater priority for 
RTI and PSID disclosure funding within the existing 
budget. This approach calls for the inclusion of RTI in 
regular, strategic decision making and an institutional 
incentive system to encourage public bodies to do so72.
 ը determine an annual budget for implementing   all 
the priority elements necessary to PSID disclosure 
and dissemination management, and allocate it as 
appropriate.
 ը Elaborate and achieve innovative monetization73,74 
strategies specific to public domain information, 
with the aim to drain direct or indirect monetary 
benefits in terms of new products, services and/
or processes improvements, in both public 
and private sectors. In this vein, some cities are  
 
 
 
72 Lemieux V. L. and Trapnell S. E. “Public Access to Information for 
Development A Guide to the Effective Implementation of Right to 
Information Laws” . 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development/The World Bank.
73 Gartner “Data Monetization refers to the process of using data to ob -
tain quantifiable economic benefit. ” https://www.gartner.com/en/infor -
mation-technology/glossary/data-monetization 
74 McKinsey “Fueling growth through data monetization. ” December 1, 
2017 https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/quantumblack/our-
insights/fueling-growth-through-data-monetization 2.437
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks ը to anchor the “open by design and by 
default”78 paradigm, as a foundational 
principle for the creation of all digital assets  
of Government information to disseminate, in full 
compliance with legal exemptions and public data 
withholding necessary for the protection of public 
interest objectives, public security, privacy and personal 
data.
78 Article 16 of the new EU directive explicitly encourages EU Member 
States to “promote the creation of data based on the principles of ‘open 
by design and by default” . Directive (EU) 2019/1024 of the European Par -
liament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on open data and the re-use 
of public sector information. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019L1024&rid=1 Adopting FAIR Data Principles can help public  
bodies to promote PSID digital assets reuse and 
interoperable exchange, and to facilitate their discovery, 
and consequently increase the opportunities of possible 
data requests and disclosure. These principles provide also 
a real data management framework for PSID assets.
In this perspective, specific organizational 
arrangements and technological choices should  
be considered by any governments, to fully 
leverage FAIR principles, and to meet opportunities,  
offered by the re-use of public data, mainly:Box.3. FAIR Data Principles76
FAIR Data Principles were published in 2016 as an integral part of the work within open science. They describe some of the most 
central guidelines for good data management and open access to research data, by mainly improving its machine-actionability, 
i.e., the capacity of data to be:
76  Wilkinson M.D. & al. “The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship” Scientific Data. 15 March 2016. https://www.nature.com/
articles/sdata201618
77  Metadata are structured information about the collected data material. This information describes the material on various levels, for 
example where and by whom it was created; on which occasions and with which methods the data were collected; what a variable  means 
and which values it can take. https://snd.gu.se/en/manage-data/prepare-and-share/FAIR-data-principlesfindable,  by being described with 
thorough relevant, and sufficiently detailed 
metadata77, and given a unique and persistent 
identifier which makes it easier to cite the data 
correctly
accessible,  in other terms understandable to 
both humans and machines, and stored in a 
trusted repository. In case of sensitive personal 
data, a confidentiality assessment needs to be made before the material release. 
interoperable,  by using a formal, accessible, 
shared, and broadly applicable language and 
accepted standards for knowledge (data and 
metadata) representation. 
reusable,  by describing data with sufficient and 
relevant metadata, that both data and metadata 
can be replicated and/or combined in different 
settings, with a clear usage license and accessible 
data usage license38
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksPSID and to favorize its reuse and appropriation by all 
stakeholders. GCIF should focus on standardization 
at different levels (such as metadata schemata, data 
representation formats and licensing conditions of 
open data)81, as an essential lever to enable broad 
disclosed PSID integration and interoperability.
2.4.2. Records Management and Planning 
Information Resource Management is a broad term in IT 
that refers to the management of records or information 
or data sets as a resource. It involves data identification as 
an  asset, its categorization, and ensures various types of 
information system active management. 
When it comes to RTI, adopting legislation mostly 
presupposes that the records are well managed. 
Indeed, effective records management enables 
authorities to enforce wider government agenda 
to increase openness, transparency, trust and 
accountability in the public sector. To achieve these 
objectives, disclosed PSID needs to be accurate, 
complete, timely, ready for retention, relevant, 
credible, and easily accessible.
81 The European Commission & The  European Multi-Stakeholder 
Platform “Rolling Plan provides an overview of the needs for ICT 
standardization” 2022. https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/rolling-
plan-ict-standardisation/public-sector-information-open-data-and-big-
data-rp2020n  ը A greater and specific focus should be put on 
promoting Open Access79, as an effective approach to 
increase visibility, usage and impact for research work, 
and to enhance the knowledge flow, around the world 
by using digital collaborative tools.
 ը to implement an “on-the-demand side” oriented 
approach to facilitate discoverability and availability 
of PSID records as well as of their associated 
metadata, through the application of the adequate 
granularity level that is required for easier reuse 
and interoperability. It should be necessary, in this 
perspective, to appropriately leverage all dissemination 
channels in government at all levels: libraries, private-
sector entities, and digital media (National one-
stop-shop, Institutional websites, Mobile, Social  
Network, etc.) in the easiest and most  
cost-effective manner. 
 ը to ensure immediate availability of dynamic 
data80 after collection and/or modification 
of the dataset, via specific well-documented 
software components and interfaces, such  
as Application Programming Interface (API), that 
enable users and beneficiaries to reuse such data to 
develop new digital services. 
 ը To develop, adopt and/or maintain the Government 
Common Interoperability Framework (GCIF) as 
a reference framework for public bodies, listing 
compliance rules for the use of norms, standards or 
references, to develop public information systems, 
in particular to share heterogeneous and sectorial 
79 IFLA“IFLA Statement on open access – clarifying IFLA’s position and 
strategy” . International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions. 
Endorsed by IFLA Governing Board, 18 April 2011 https://cdn.ifla.org/
wp-content/uploads/files/assets/hq/news/documents/ifla-statement-on-
open-access.pdf 
80 Documents in a digital form, subject to frequent or real-time updates, in 
particular because of their volatility or rapid obsolescence (https://www.
lawinsider.com/dictionary/dynamic-data). Traffic, weather, environmental, 
climate, satellite and field sensor generated data, are typically considered 
as dynamic data39
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksTherefore, governments should put in place  
effective national and institutional frameworks including 
adequate capacity to manage technical activities of 
recording, preserving, and making accessible PSID 
resources.
In this objective, governments should be backed by a 
flexible action plan, based on an integrated life-cycle 
approach in monitoring disclosed PSID resources, 
from the planning stage, to production, organization, 
dissemination, use, preservation and, in appropriate 
circumstances, purging. Records management and 
archival functions should also be incorporated in the 
design, development, and implementation of public 
information systems.
On another hand, governments, but also IT and 
archival professionals, as well as international  
and donor agencies, should cooperate and provide 
full support to efforts of national and archival 
institutions to better manage official records 
irrespective of media. 
Governments should also establish, adopt and/or 
develop standards and guidelines defining functional 
requirements for digital records management, 
that are mandatory to ensure their integrity and 
trustworthiness. Compliance with such standards 
will permit to governments to demonstrate proof  
of the authenticity and reliability of their  
information and data records, when required to  
do so in relation to RTI laws, arbitration of disputes 
or legal proceedings.2.4.3. Measures to Build Trust in  
Public Sector Information and Data
Cybersecurity Imperative
An unprecedented open release of public information 
is nowadays coupled to a high-volume exchange 
of extremely sensitive and/or personal data across 
government agencies and citizens. At the same time, 
digital phenomena such as cloud computing, mobility, 
social media, big data, and artificial intelligence give 
rise to several complex security challenges as well as 
countless concerns for citizen privacy82, with potential 
threats ranging from hacking or misinformation and 
disinformation to cyber-terrorism.
Therefore, it is important to elaborate and apply an adequate 
legal framework and implement appropriate safeguards, to 
ensure the long-term preservation of the public domain 
information to disseminate, but also and mostly to 
manage risks and vulnerabilities related to digital security, 
confidentiality and privacy issues that are induced by 
architecting for openness and adopting new technologies. 
Specific certifications of security management system, as 
ISO/IEC 2700183, are also strongly recommended.
82 B. Bounabat “From e-government to digital Government” Invited paper. 
Electronic Journal of Information Technology (eTI) Issue 10. Copyright (c) 
2017
83 ISO/IEC 27001. «  INFORMATION SECURITY MANAGEMENT » . https://
www.iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-security.html 40
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National FrameworksTraceability and Accountability
Governments should reinforce traceability practices  
as an essential component of PSID disclosure 
development and promotion. Indeed, traceability 
permits the gathering of trustful data for forecasting 
citizens’ PSID requests, following their related 
processing workflows, and quickly identifying and 
resolving the root causes of possible issue. Without 
adequate and reliable records of requests and/or 
appeals received and how they are processed, it 
would be difficult to measure, and report progress on 
access to information. In this perspective, a special 
attention should be given to: 
 ը record-keeping as part of PSID requests 
management system, that plays an important  
role in fostering accountability and good governance; 
and
 ը reporting as an essential tool for traceability 
and accountability, as well as for gathering 
evidence and data in mapping any gaps 
and needs as a precondition for performing  
targeted improvements.
2.4.4. Information System  
Governance in a PSID Context  
IT governance is defined as the set of processes that ensure 
the effective and efficient use of IT in enabling an organization 
to achieve its goals84. It aims also at deriving improved 
value from investment in information and technology by 
ensuring its alignment with overall strategic objectives, 
and helping to manage IT risks effectively. Public bodies are 
increasingly setting-up their IT governance programs, which 
84 https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/glossary/it-go -
vernanceare often based on frameworks created by industry experts 
and used by thousands of organizations, such as  Control 
Objectives for Information and Related Technology85 
(COBIT) focusing on process management and Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library86  (ITIL)  focusing on 
service management, including implementation guides  
with fewer speedbumps.
While implementing their IT governance programs, 
public bodies should integrate PSID development and 
dissemination dimension, as a major strategic “business 
objective” to consider in the earlier phase of any IT 
development action plan. This will permit to governmental 
Information Systems not only to deal adequately with 
confidentiality issues, financial accountability requirements, 
data retention and disaster recovery, but also to ensure 
the strategic alignment of IT infrastructure with the aim 
of guaranteeing access to public sector information, and 
more generally implementing RTI efficiently.
85 COBIT: https://www.isaca.org/resources/cobit 
86 ITIL: https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/itil 41
Development and Promotion of the Right to Information in National Frameworks8Encourage and support PSID Proactive 
Release, mainly by conducting “harm test” based 
assessment that check if there is a foreseeable clearly 
proven damage in disclosing a governmental information
9Exercise copyright and intellectual property 
rights related to the management of data and 
information, in a way that facilitates re-use and 
interoperability
10Set-up an oversight and appeals body for PSID 
disclosure, empowered with necessary legitimacy and 
strong leadership to achieve its missions of steering, hearing 
of appeals, investigating complaints, issuing eventual 
binding resolutions, and controls and compliance auditing.
11Reinforce institutional capacities necessary to 
conduct PSID disclosure policy, mainly PSID disclosure 
practices formalization, customized training and awareness 
campaign about RTI and PSID dissemination, at the benefit 
of both public and administrations, and establishment of 
institutional incentive system to drain financial resources, 
specifically through PSID monetization strategies.
Implement appropriate practices for PSID Resources 
governance, integrating the application of FAIR 
principles to manage data velocity and complexity, 
efficient records’ management and planning, measures 
and practices to build trust in released data, and PSID 
disclosure impact on IT development action plan.1Provide for and /or reinforce RTI as constitutional 
right, and make sure that it is not and cannot be 
countermanded by other laws
2Ensure that access strategies to PSID  
are inclusive, involving all groups with  most  difficulties 
to  access to information: the  elderly, racial and ethnic 
minorities, linguistic minorities, people with disabilities, 
rural populations, digitally low-skilled or illiterate persons, 
and those of low socio-economic status. 
3Consider PSID availability and openness in  
a broad framework, to all public information and 
documents collected or produced by public institutions at 
national level, and local level, through public funds, and/or 
as part of partnerships with the private sector, NGOs or 
intergovernmental organizations.
4Recognize and integrate the legal value and 
the authenticity of any format holding  
public information, and of any the medium, as well 
as all means, ways and media to collect and 
disseminate PSID. 
5Set-up appropriate assessment instruments to 
measure progress made in the fulfilment of the state 
of its duty to guarantee PSID access.
6Ensure all necessary support for PSID requests, 
and define clearly appeal process in case of failures to 
provide information, principally aspects related to the review 
bodies and the binding degree of their decisions.
7Mitigate carefully public information withholding, 
by ensuring mutual consistency between RTI laws and 
data privacy legislation, establishing a clear timetable for 
unlocking restricted information, and leveraging Data 
sanitization techniques, to enlarge accessible PSID scope.
Recommendations for 
Member States3Development and Promotion
of the Right to Informationin National Frameworks
Policy Guidelines 
