1 IFLA-UNESCO Public Library Manifesto  2022  
Freedom, prosperity  and the development of society and of individuals are fundamental human values. They will 
only be attained through the ability of well -informed citizens to exercise their democratic rights and to play an 
active role in society. Constructive participation and the development of democracy depend on satisfactory 
education as well as on free and unlimited access to knowledge, thought, culture and information.  
The public library , the local gateway to knowledge, provides a basic condition for lifelong learning, independent 
decision - making and cultural development of the individual and social groups.  It underpins  healthy knowledge 
societies through providing access to and enabling  the creation and sharing of knowledge of all sorts, including 
scientific and local knowledge  without commercial , technological  or legal barriers.  
In every nation, but especially in the developing world, libraries help ensure that the rights to education and 
participation in knowledge societ ies and in the cultural life of the community are accessible to as many people 
as possible.  
This Manifesto pro claims UNESCO's belief in the public library as a living force for education, culture , inclusion  
and information, as an essential agent for sustainable development, and for individual fulfilment  of peace and 
spiritual welfare through the minds of all indiv iduals.  
UNESCO therefore encourages national and local governments to support and actively engage in the 
development of public libraries.  
The Public Library  
The public library is the local centre of information, making all kinds of knowledge and informatio n readily 
available to its users.  It is an essential component of knowledge societ ies, continuously adapting to new means 
of communication to fulfil  their mandate of  providing universal access to and enabling meaningful  use of 
information for all people.  It provides publicly accessible space for  the production of knowledge,  sharing and 
exchange of information  and culture, and promotion of civic engagement.  
Libraries are creators of community, proactively reaching out to new audiences and  using effective listening to 
support the design of services that meet local needs and contribute to improving quality of life . The public has 
trust in their library, and in return, it is the ambition of the  public library to  proactively keep their community 
informe d and aware.  
The services of the public library are provided on the basis of equality of access for all, regardless of age, 
ethnicity , gender , religion, nationality, language , social status , and any other characteristic . Specific services and 
materials must be provided for those users who cannot, for whatever reason, use the regular services and 
UNESCO-IFLA-Manifesto/07/20222 materials, for example linguistic minorities, people  with disabilities , poor digital or computer skills, poor literacy 
abilitie s or people in hospital or prison.  
All age groups must find material relevant to their needs. Collections and services have to include all types of 
appropriate media and modern technologies as well as traditional materials. High quality , relevan ce to local  
needs and conditions , and reflective of  the language and cultural diversity of the community  are fundamental. 
Material must reflect current trends and the evolution of society, as well as the memory of human endeavour 
and imagination.  
Collections and serv ices should not be subject to any form of ideological, political or religious censorship, nor 
commercial pressures.  
Missions of the Public Library  
The following key missions which relate to information, literacy, education , inclusi vity,  civic participation  and 
culture should be at the core of public library services . Through these key missions, public libraries contribute to 
the Sustainable Development Goals and the construction of more equitable , humane,  and sustainable societies . 
•Providing access to a broad range of information and ideas free from censorship , supporting formal and
informal education at all levels as well as lifelong learning enabling the ongoing, voluntary and self -
conducted pursuit of knowledge for people at all stages of life ;
•providi ng opportunities for personal creative development , and stimulating imagination, creativity,
curiosity, and empathy ;
•creating and strengthening reading habits in children from birth  to adulthood;
•initiating, supporting and participating in  literacy activities and programmes  to build  reading and writing
skills , and facilitating the development of media and information literacy and digital literacy skills for all
people at all ages, in the spirit of equipping an informed, democratic society;
•providing services to their communities both in -person and remotely through d igital technologies
allowing access to information, collections, and programmes whenever possible ;
•ensuring access for all people to all sorts of community information and opportunities for community
organising, in recognition of the library’s role at the core of the social fabric;
•providing their communities with access to scientific knowledge, such as research results and health
information that can impact the lives of their users, as well as enabling participation in scientific
progress ;
•providing adequa te information services to local enterprises, associations and interest groups;
•preservation of, and access to, local and Indigenous data, knowledge , and heritage  (including oral
tradition) , providing an environment in which the local community can take an  active role in identifying
materials to be captured, preserved and shared,  in accordance with the community' s wishes ;
•fostering inter -cultural dialogue and favouring cultural diversity;
•promoting preservation of and meaningful access to cultural expressio ns and heritage, appreciation of
the arts, open access to scientific knowledge, research and innovations, as expressed in traditional
media, as well as digitised and born -digital material .3 Funding, legislation and networks  
Access to the public library building and services shall in principle be free of charge. The public library is the 
responsibility of local and national authorities. It must be supported by specific and update d legislation aligned 
to international treaties and agreements.  It must be financed by national and local governments. It has to be an 
essential component of any long -term strategy for culture, information provision, literacies and education.  
In the digital era, copyright and intellectual property legi slation  must ensure public libraries the same capacity to 
procure  and giv e access to digital content on reasonable terms as is the case with  physical resources.  
To ensure nationwide library coordination and cooperation, legislation and strategic plans must  also define and 
promote a national library network based on agreed standards of service.  
The public library network must be designed in relation to national, regional, research and special libraries as 
well as libraries in schools, colleges and universiti es.  
Operation and management  
A clear policy must be formulated, defining objectives, priorities and services in relation to the local community 
needs. The importance of local knowledge and community participation is valuable to this process, and local 
com munities should be included in decision -making.  
The public library has to be organized effectively and professional standards of operation must be maintained.  
Services have to be physically  or digitally  accessible to all members of the community. This requires well situated 
and equipped library buildings, good reading and study facilities, as well as relevant technologies and sufficient 
opening hours convenient to the users. It equally implies outreach s ervices for those unable to visit the library.   
The library services must be adapted to the different needs of communities in rural and urban areas , as well as 
to the needs of marginalized groups , users with special needs, multilingual users, and Indigenou s Peoples within 
the community.  
The librarian is an active intermediary between users and resources , both digital and traditional . Sufficient 
human and material resources, as well as p rofessional and continuing education of the librarian , to meet the 
challenges for now and in the future , are indispensable  to ensure adequate services.  Consultation by leadership 
with library professionals as to the quantitative and qualitative definition of sufficient resources should be 
undertaken.   
Outreach and user educa tion programmes have to be provided to help users benefit from all the resources.  
Ongoing research should focus on evaluating library impact and collecting data, in order to  demonstrate  the 
societal benefit  of libraries to policy makers . Statistical data should be collected long -term, as the benefits of 
libraries within society are often seen in subsequent generations.  
Partnerships 
Establishing partnerships is essential for libraries to reach a broader and  more diverse public. Cooperation with 
relevant partners - for example, user groups, schools, non -governmental or ganisations, library associations, 
businesses, and other professionals at local, regional, national as well as international level - has to be e nsured.  4 Implementing the Manifesto  
Decision makers at national and local levels and the library community at large, around the world, are hereby 
urged to implement the principles expressed in this Manifesto.  
18 July 2022  