 
EMPOWERING
YOUTH  IN AFRICA
 THROUGH  MEDIA
AND COMM UNIC ATION
LAGOS, 2I FOR A NEW MEDIA NARRATIVE ON MIGRATION 
IN WEST AND CENTRAL AFRICA 
Migration is a phenomenon dating back to the 
dawn of time. Today, as in the past, men and 
women leave their homeland in search of new 
possibilities, to escape conflict, poverty or 
drought, or to seize new opportunities. Africa, 
the cradle of humanity, is at the heart of 
today's attention, through images and testi­
monies of young Africans ready to do anything 
to reach the so-called "European Eldorado", 
sometimes risking their lives. Of course, 
migrant men, women and children's ongoing 
tragedies in the Sahelian desert and the Medi­
terranean Sea are an unacceptable reality, but 
most migration -and this is the case in West 
and Central Africa -takes place within the 
sub-region. In 2050, the African continent will 
have nearly 2.5 billion inhabitants, i.e. a quarter 
of the world's population, and 35% of the wor-Id's young people will be Afri­
cans. In view of these figures, it 
is urgent to initiate reflection in 
order to anticipate and plan 
actions around the migration 
issue, from all perspectives. 
The media have and will have 
a decisive role to play in this 
respect Implemented by 
UNESCO in Dakar since 2018, 
with the support of the Italian 
Agency for Cooperation and 
Development (AICS), via the 
Italian Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and International Coo-
peration's (MAECI) " Fund for 
Africa ", the project "Empowering Youth in 
Africa through Media and Communication" 
aims to build up media professionals' capaci­
ties to report on migration in eight West and 
Central African countries, thus empowering 
young boys and girls to make informed deci­
sions on migration issues through better 
access to quality information (ODD 16. 10). The 
project activities were carried out with the 
support of the UNESCO offices in Abuja, 
Yaounde, Accra, Abidjan, Bamako and Brus­
sels, and in close collaboration with UNES­
CO's partners (governments, media and 
media associations, CSOs/NGOs, artists, etc.). 
This brochure, dedicated to Bouli Adamou Ide, 
a Nigerian journalist who was a project benefi­
ciary and who suddenly disappeared in 2021, 
is a summary of these efforts. 
Dimitri Sanga 
Director of UNESCO's Regional Office -
for West Africa (Sahel) 3gratio et deontolog e es 4SN/CI/2022/PI/H/4I CAMEROON IVORY COAST GHANA GUINEA-CONAKRY MALI NIGER NIGERIA SENEGAL 
II 
About 60% of the African population is young, and 
19% are between 15 and 24 years old Their quest for 
opportunities to meet educational, economic, social, 
security or other personal needs is considerable. As 
existing statistics show, a significant proportion of 
young people, about 21% in developing countries, 
resort to internal or international migration in the 
hope of fulfilling their dream of a decent and secure 
life. According to the United Nations Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA), migration 
from West Africa is very diverse, but most migrants 
who originate from West Africa remain in the sub-re­
gion, and two out of three will be living in another 
West African country by 2020. 
Migration offers opportunities, but it also entails 
risks, sometimes considerable, as evidenced by the 
perilous routes undertaken by young African 
migrants, in the Sahelian desert, in the Mediter­
ranean Sea and off the Atlantic coast, to reach the 
Maghreb and/or Europe. 
In most of Africa, young people's decision to migrate, 
when not forced, is based on testimonies, such as 
those of friends and family members. In a study on 
young migrants in 2017, REACH found that "the 
information received was often general and not 
always fully representative of the difficulties they 
might encounter along the way': However, the 
weakness of the information received is not limited 
to these difficulties, but also to the real opportunities 
that migration offers as well as to migrants' rights, 
especially for women and minors. At the same time, 
media narratives on migration in West and Central 
Africa have been strongly focused on irregular 
migration, thus limiting local populations' access to 
diversified information on migration issues, more in 
line with real-life situations. 
The project "Empowering young people in Africa 
through media and communication" aims to build 
media professionals' capacities, both men and 
women, in the treatment of information on various 
aspects of migration (irregular, legal, intra-regional, I ::C 11 
female, etc.), in order to guarantee public access to 
quality information on migration, and to enable local 
populations, especially young men and women, to 
take informed decisions on migration. 
Through this project, financed by the Italian Agency 
for Development Cooperation (AICS), via the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Coope­
ration's "Fondo Africa", UNESCO is contributing to 
the implementation of Sustainable Development 
Goal 16. 10 to "ensure public access to information 
and guarantee fundamental freedoms"; the United 
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists 
and the Issue of Impunity; Goal 3 of the Global 
Compact on Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration 
(A/CONF.231 /3), which recommends "providing 
accurate information at all stages of migration': Simi­
larly, following the African Union's Agenda 2063, the 
Migration Policy Framework for Africa calls for -
among other strategic actions -"providing access to 
accurate pre-departure and post-arrival labor 
migration information, including employment condi­
tions, remedies and access to legal advice in case of 
violation': This project is also part of UNESCO's 
"Sahel Strategy", and its priorities ''Africa" and 
"Gender': Since its official launch in 2019, more than 
90 activities have been implemented at national and 
regional level, benefiting nearly 2,000 journalists, 
influencers and artists, 800 media outlets, in close 
collaboration with over 180 stakeholders. 5II MIGRATION MEDIA AWARDS II 
AWARDING JOURNALISTS FOR BETTER INFORMATION 
The international community, through the Global 
Compact on Migration, calls for regular, orderly and 
secure migration. At all times and in all places. 
However, the construction of new narratives on 
migration, based on the principle of public access 
to information, is struggling to take shape in 
newsrooms. In order to arouse journalists' interest 
in covering migration issues and to remind them of 
their role in sensitizing young people on migration, 
Mediatude, one of the main news web platforms in 
Cameroon, organized a competition for the best 
audiovisual report in the "Migration Media Awards" 
category, as part of their annual "Media Awards" 
competition. 
This initiative, supported by UNESCO's Regional 
Office for Central Africa, aimed to stimulate the 
production and broadcasting of radio and TV 
reports on migration in Cameroon. A total of 13 
editorial contents were submitted to the jury, 
composed of an academic, a radio/TV producer 
and an expert on migration issues, which tackled 
different perspectives on the theme (notably 
access to information for migrants, migrant 
women's vulnerability, irregular migration, 
development issues related to migration, migration 
in the context of the COVID-19 crisis). The jury 
judged 13 competing productions on the basis of content and form (subject mastery, technical 
quality, choice of speakers, consideration of human 
rights). 
Mediatude awarded the prizes, consisting of 
production materials to encourage the winners to 
continue their efforts, on 24 April 2021 at a 
ceremony attended by 250 young people and 
broadcast live on Facebook. The first prize was 
awarded to Charles Biyo'o Ella, a journalist at 
independent radio station Tiemeni Siantou FM and 
author of a series of investigations on agribusiness 
supported by the prestigious Pulitzer Centre, for his 
report on the difficult social and economic 
reintegration of returning migrants; The second 
prize was awarded to Ngala Kilian Chimtom, BBC 
correspondent for Central Africa, for an 
investigation on the vulnerability of Cameroonian 
migrant women, victims of human trafficking in the 
Middle East; finally, the third prize was won by Jean 
Christian Nselel, a freelance journalist, for his 
television report on the town of Edea, in the Littoral 
region of Cameroon, a melting pot of migrants 
leaving for Europe. 
Partner : Mediatude 
I 6I YOUTH AGAINST IRREGULAR MIGRATION 
AND FOR EMPLOYMENT 
Information and awareness-raising campaigns 
on youth empowerment, irregular migration and 
employment challenges were implemented -in 
2020 and 2021 -in several lvorian cities 
(including Abidjan, Bingerville, Bouafle, Bouake, 
Daloa and Yamoussoukro), considered to be 
among the main departure points for young 
people seeking to 
emigrate irregularly, 
especially to Europe. A 
forum and a series of 
exchange and 
feedback sessions 
were organized for 
journalists, bloggers 
and lvorian youth 
organizations, as well 
as radio broadcasts 
aimed at a wide 
audience in local 
languages (particularly 
in Ebrie, Malinke and 
Abbey). 
Nearly fifty youth associations (gathering more 
than 850 young people in total), more than 60 
journalists and bloggers, and lvorian returnees took 
part in these activities, covering topics such as « 
Starting from scratch and making a success of 
your life»,« My life, a testimony for the fight against 
irregular migration", "Media and journalists' 
contribution to a better access to information on 
migration and the fight against fake news». 
The exchange days enabled young lvorian leaders 
to strengthen their capacities for organizing 
information and awareness-raising campaigns on 
migration risks and employment in their territories, 
in local languages. Recommendations were made 
on the role of the media, youth and women in the 
fight against irregular migration. Among others, the 
State was called upon to fight against corruption, to 
value merit, to create peace and stability necessary 
for employment, and to develop demonetization 
and digitalization. Young people were encouraged to be better 
informed and to play a leadership role on the issue 
of migration, while women were urged not to 
encourage their children to venture onto the 
perilous roads to Europe, but to formalize 
income-generating activities and develop female 
leadership in the fight against irregular migration. 
Stakeholders 
Ministry of Youth Promo­
tion and Employment; 
Ministry of Communica­
tion and Media; Ministry of 
African Integration and 
lvorians Abroad (DGIE); 
IOM; Youth Employment 
Agency; Publishers' 
Students' Association of 
Cote d'Ivoire (REPECI); 
DEBORAH Women's 
Association; Dynamic 
Youth Investors Club of Zoukougbe (CIJDZ); Coali­
tion of Pupils and Students of Cote d'Ivoire; National 
Youth Council; Agricultural Cooperative of Bouafle; 
Federation of the Union of Communal Youth of Cote 
d'Ivoire; Felix Houphouet-Boigny Foundation; Youth 
communities of Balouzon, Bediala, Bonon, Daloa, 
Gadoua, Guessabo, Guezon, Guipri, Sapia, Tagoura, 
Tibetia and Vavoua; Generation lnnovante (GI); 
Ligue Against Illegal Immigration, Assistance and 
Development (LISAD); Mairie de Yamoussoukro 
ONG fraternite-solidarite-jeunesse; Media Women's 
Organisation committed to positive development 
(OFM ED+); Professional Journalists Organisation of 
Cote d'Ivoire; Digital Platform of Cote d'Ivoire; Radio 
de Bingerville; Radio La Paix (Yamoussoukro); 
Student Network for Development, Excellence and 
Peace in Cote d'Ivoire (REDEPCI); Network of 
Online Press Professionals; Youth Senate of 
Haut-Sassandra. 7WHEN GRAFFITI ARTISTS CHALLENGE THE MEDIA 
Graffiti is now an integral part of African urban 
cultures. It is an art form that is particularly 
popular among young people, accessible to all 
social strata and recognized for its committed 
social messages. The UN ESCO Office in Accra, 
in partnership with Graffiti Ghana, 
implemented a communication and awareness 
campaign in 2021, gathering ten graffiti artists, 
including five of Ghanaian origin (Mohammed 
Awudu, Ian Kwakye, Ervin Clinton, Matilda 
Amegee, Musah Abdul Rahman and 
Jahpower), for the creation of several graffiti on 
the theme of access to migration-related 
information. A large mural was inaugurated at 
the Kwame Nkrumah Circle, in the presence of UNESCO's Representative in Ghana, Mr. 
Abdourahamane Diallo, the Italian Ambassador 
in Accra, Mrs. Daniela d'Orlandi, and the Chief of 
Mission of the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) in Ghana, Mr. Abibatou 
Wane-Fall.« The graffiti's objective is to denounce 
the Jack of information available to young 
Ghanaians when they leave our country, and the 
role that the media can play to better inform them 
about migration,» says Mohammed Awudu. The 
campaign has been reinforced by the production 
of visuals on the link between information and 
migration, disseminated on social networks, and 
the production of video interviews with returnees, 
named « Street Vox Pop » 
I A sec ond wave of producti ons a llowed the broadcast of 4 04 radio programs (60 
round tabl es, 60 educati onal talks, 30 m icro-programs, 90 m agazin es, 150 i nter active 
programs, 14 reports). These  programs  were broadc ast in 17 local langua ges. 
8I MIGRATION ON RURAL RADIO 
Guinea is a departure and transit country in West 
Africa. According to the "National Migration 
Profile 2020" published by the IOM, while nearly 
75% of Guineans migrate to neighboring 
countries, since 2014-15 "irregular migration of 
young people to Europe has grown considerably 
and constitutes one of the multiple mobility 
dynamics underway': According to the Minister 
of Communication and Information, Mr. Amara 
Sompare, « young Guineans who attempt the 
perilous crossing of the desert and the 
Mediterranean come mainly from rural areas, where 
the population is poorly informed about the details 
surrounding these journeys ». 
As community radios are the most 
listened to media in the rural world, 
UNESCO, in partnership with the 
Directorate of Rural Radios of Guinea, 
organized in 2020, in Conakry, a training 
workshop with 30 journalists and rural 
radio hosts (20 men and 10 women) for 
the production of radio programs on the 
treatment of information on migration 
and its risks, and local employment 
opportunities for young people, 
particularly in the agricultural sector. This 
training was followed by the production 
and broadcast of 270 media programs, 
including 30 round tables, 60 educational talks, 60 magazines, 60 
micro-programs and 60 interactive programs. 
"Europe is not the paradise on earth that young 
people imagine it to be. It is necessary that 
young people understand that by choosing the 
irregular route, they enrich human traffickers and 
put their lives at risk," emphasizes Oumar 
Konate, a journalist from Kankan rural radio. In 
2021, a feedback workshop enabled participating 
rural radio stations to discuss their 2020 editorial 
content in order to improve its quality.   
9AN INFORMATION KIT TO EQUIP JOURNALISTS 
ON HOW TO REPORT ON MIGRATION 
How to inform local populations on migration 
issues in a country weakened by political 
instability and the threat of violent extremism? 
This is what is at stake in the "Migration Infor­
mation Kit" produced by UNESCO and com­
munication agency Arc-en-ciel, published in 
French and Bambara, to promote professional 
and impartial reporting on migration. Printed in 
250 copies, then handed out to Malian journa-lists and media outlets, the kit is the culmina­
tion of a long process launched in December 
2020, during an awareness-raising workshop 
on reporting on migration in Mali. 15 journalists 
were gathered in Segou, in central Mali, in 
order to enhance their knowledge of journalis­
tic investigation techniques, the different 
aspects of migration in Mali and the treatment 
of migrants by the Malian media. It was noted 
« The role of journalists in informing the public on migration issues is essential, even if promoting regu­
lar migration requires efforts from each one of us ». 
Mr. Sine Dembele, Director of Cabinet of the President of the Segou Regional Council 
that: media treatment of migrants is neither 
balanced nor up to the challenges they face; 
insecurity makes it difficult for journalists to 
work in the field; migrants' enormous contribu­
tion to their homeland's and host country's 
economies is not sufficiently highlighted, and 
reporting on migration risks is insufficient. 
To cite just one example among many, 
according to the World Bank, Mali was in 9th 
place among the countries receiving the most 
funds from its diaspora, with 900 million dollars 
in 2018, i.e. 6.7% of national GDP. «After a dazzling start, Malian media are now facing 
stagnation, particularly because of financial 
difficulties, which have worsened with the 
security situation in the country, as well as 
training and ethics problems,» says 
Souleymane Drabo, a professor at the Higher 
School of Journalism and Communication 
Sciences (ESJSC), in Bamako. 
Hence the need to produce and disseminate to 
media professionals an information kit to 
produce balanced and impartial reports on 
various aspects of migration in Mali. 
I 10I « MIGRATION DESKS» AT THE SERVICE 
OF INFORMATION ON MIGRATION 
Located at the crossroads of migration routes between West Africa 
and the Maghreb, Niger is a country of departure, reception and 
transit in the Sahel region. The emergence and spread of the coro­
navirus disease, and the consequent partial or total closure of 
borders, had a strong impact on migration flows in the sub-region 
in 2020, including in Niger. 
Since 2019, UNESCO has been working on various activities to 
strengthen journalists' capacity to process migration information 
and give local populations access to quality information on migra­
tion issues. In the Zinder region, which is affected by the movement 
of migrant women and their children 
to Algeria, UNESCO and the African 
Professional Communication Asso­
ciation (APAC-Niger) have conti­
nuously trained some thirty commu­
nity radio presenters, who have 
produced and broadcast nearly 150 
radio programs on female migration 
and child trafficking. With the support 
of the Association of Journalists for 
Security and Migration (AJSEM), 
exchange forums were organized in 
Nyamey with Nigerien journalists and 
media managers, to set up "migration 
desks" within their newsrooms, and 
thus encourage the production and 
broadcasting of quality editorial 
content on various aspects of migra­
tion (legal, irregular, intra-regional, 
national migration policy, impact of 
the diaspora, migrant integration in 
Niger, etc.). 
Following selection procedures, 08 "Migration Desks" were set up in 
the following media: 03 televisions (TV Bonferey, TV Labari and TV 
Tambara), 02 radios (Radio Challenge and Radio Garkoua), and 03 
newspapers (L'Eclosion, Air Infos and Le Potentiel). More than 100 
editorial contents were produced and broadcast in 2021 (60 radio 
programs, 16 TV programs and 35 articles), and 200 additional editorial 
contents are planned for 2022.   
11AN ETHICALLOOKAT 
THE THEME OF MIGRATION 
« This exhibition is the result of experimental work aimed at offering a deeper perspective on the theme 
of migration, through an ethical look at the photography of migrants' struggles and successes, and how 
they are represented » 
Osaze EFE, Artistic Director of the Arts For Humanity Foundation. 
« A picture is worth more than a thousand 
words». This is especially true when it is adorned 
with an ethical look at a sensitive issue such as 
migration. On 18 May 2021, UNESCO and the Arts 
for Humanity Foundation inaugurated in Abuja, 
Nigeria, a photographic exhibition entitled « En 
Route », which illustrated the work of ten 
talented young Nigerian photojournalists, tracing 
the lives of returning migrants, migrant families or 
sons of migrants in Nigeria. 
The exhibition is the result of a capacity building 
workshop for photojournalists on ethical issues 
related to migration images. After the workshop 
held in Benin City in April 2021, the 10 selected 
photographers (including two women) decided to 
follow migrants -men and women -in their daily 
lives, sharing their dreams and disillusionment 
Alade Aderonke, a young freelance photographer, 
chose to tell the unique story of Sharon Suleiman 
Abrazado, born to a Nigerian father and a Filipino 
mother, who lives in Abuja. « I feel that media 
regularly report on the stories of irregular 
migrants, and pay Jess attention to the 
migration phenomenon in Nigeria », says 
Aderonke. « This is what convinced me to tell 
Sharon's story». Omoregie Osakpolor opted for 
an intimate portrait of a family waiting for news of 
their loved ones who have gone abroad illegally 
and have not been heard from since. 
Partner: Arts For Humanity Foundation 
I 12
I FOCUS ON FREEDOM OF ECOWAS 
PEOPLE'S MOBILITY 
On the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the 
Economic Community of West African States 
(ECOWAS) Protocol on the Free Movement of 
Goods and Persons, the Right of Residence and 
Establishment, UNESCO, in collaboration with 
the Panos Institute for West Africa (PIWA), 
organized on 23 October 2019, in Dakar, an 
awareness-raising Forum for journalists on the 
implementation of said Protocol in Senegal. A 
total of 27 media professionals (15 men and 12 
women) took part in the Forum, following which, 
represented media were invited to submit report 
proposals on freedom of circulation for persons 
in the Senegalese territory. Out of 14 applications, 
eight were selected (01 TV, 02 radio, 03 print and 
02 on line), on a wide variety of themes, ranging 
from the complex relations between the 
Ghanaian community and host communities in 
Basse-Casamance ("L'Enquete") to the 
sub-regional commercial market of Diaobe, a 
town located in Casamance, 60 kilometres from 
the border with Guinea-Bissau ("La Maison des 
Reporters"), to the benefits generated by the new Farafenni Bridge. This bridge, which, despite 
persistent difficulties, has allowed the population, 
and in particular traders, to avoid wasting a lot of 
time crossing the Gambia River, which separates 
Senegal and the Gambia, as in the past 
Partner: Panos Institute for West Africa (PIWA) 13MIGRATION UNDER INVESTIGATIVE 
JOURNALISM'S PERSPECTIVE 
Investigative journalism is one of democracy's 
most important tools. It is also a way to better 
inform citizens about the challenges of migration 
in West and Central Africa. With its mandate to 
implement the United Nations Plan of Action on 
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of 
Impunity, adopted in 2012, UNESCO has 
strengthened the skills of nearly 235 journalists 
(including 95 women) on investigative journalism 
techniques applied to migration, through 10 
training workshops organized in 2019 in the 
project's 08 target countries. 
Among the 105 investigative projects presented 
by experienced journalists after the training 
sessions, 08 reporters (04 men, 04 women) 
benefited from additional training organized in 
Dakar in November 2019, followed by financial 
support from UNESCO, enabling them to implement their journalistic 
investigation. Despite many 
obstacles encountered in the 
field following the spread of 
the coronavirus disease in 
the sub-region, 07 reports 
were produced and 
broadcast, addressing 
among others the themes of 
transnational dimension of 
migration risks, female migration, human 
trafficking, misinformation of migrants, integration 
of migrants in the sub-region. 
~ Ill 
CUSTOM­
And we dey lookinside relocate mata wey dey our border? ... 
Media partners : Canal 2 lnternational/CRTV (Cameroon), Allo Police (Cote d'Ivoire), Le Lynx/La Lance 
(Guinea), Le Challenger (Mali), L'lndependant Plus (Niger), The Nation (Nigeria) and Emedia.sn (Senegal), 
Stakeholders : Wole Sonyinka Centre for Investigative Journalism (Nigeria), Panos Institute for West Africa 
(Senegal), Network of Investigative Journalists in Mali, Media Foundation for West Africa (Ghana), House of 
Press (Guinea). 
« The training workshops helped me to better understand investigative journalism and migration issues. 
I now feel much more confident to do investigative reporting, taking into account gender in this issue, 
a crucial human rights dimension». 
Carole Yemelong, journalist and former senior reporter at Canal 2 International (Cameroon). 
I 14
I BETTER INFORMATION FOR BETTER MIGRATION 
The International Day is presented by the United Nations as an opportunity to dispel prejudices 
against migrants and to raise awareness on their contributions in the economic, cultural and social 
fields, to the benefit of both their countries of origin and their countries of destination. It is also an 
opportunity to better inform young people about the risks of irregular migration routes and 
migrants' basic rights as outlined in the Global Pact on Migration. 
On the occasion of the International Migrants Day 
celebrated on 18 December 2020, UNESCO and its 
partners joined forces with a regional information 
and awareness-raising campaign on migration 
and the risks of stigmatization faced by migrants 
in the context of the COVID-19 crisis, via social 
networks and local media. In order to reach a wide 
audience, video clips, cartoons, audio and visual 
messages were produced in French, English and 20 
national official languages: Beti (Cameroon); Agni, 
Bete, Guere, Baoule (Cote d'Ivoire); Fanti, Asante 
(Ghana); Soussou, Malinke (Guinea-Conakry); 
Bambara, Peul, Songhay (Mali); Haoussa, Djerma 
(Niger); lgbo, Yorouba and Pidgin (Nigeria); 
Mandingue, Serere and Wolof (Senegal). 
In a fortnight, the campaign reached nearly 6 million 
views and 300,000 engagements on the different 
digital platforms (Twitter, Facebook, YouTube and 
lnstagram). The awareness-raising campaign 
included French-Burkina be cartoonist Damien Glez, 
author of 10 drawings illustrating different aspects of 
news coverage on migration (such as journalists' Migration el (des)information ~-------:Elois 
if{(:'.'~ 
' -•t 
safety, journalism schools or challenges 
related to information sources), actors, as well 
as rappers and slammers from Senegal and 
Niger, including Matador, Xuman, ISS, Mamy 
Victory, MC MO, Eve Crazy, Wizaby, Athless, 
Dev Voice and Soul MOM. 15
FOCUS ON INFORMATION AND MIGRATION 
The fight against misinformation and " bad 
information "on migration, especially via social 
networks, requires quality editorial content, 
needed by the population, especially young 
aspiring migrants, migrants on the move and 
returnees, to make informed choices about 
migration. Such productions can prevent 
irregular and risky migration and encourage 
safe, legal and responsible migration. However, 
local media, whose role is crucial, is not always 
able to deal with information on a complex poli­
tical, social, economic and cultural phenome­
non, which has been further accentuated by 
the COVI D-19 crisis. 
From September to November 2021, UNESCO, 
in collaboration with audiovisual group 
RACECO, supported the production and 
broadcasting of a series of six major reports on 
information and migration in West and Central 
Africa, for the magazine "Population d'Afrique" 
broadcast by TV5 Monde and Quest-TV (in 
English, French and Portuguese). Filmed in 
Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Nigeria 
and Senegal, the series' objective was to 
highlight the difficulties and challenges of 
1V5MONDE producing editorial content on the theme of 
migration, as well as young people's access to 
information related to migration. Produced in a 
26-minute format, our special correspondents 
addressed the issue from different angles (irre­
gular and legal migration, intra-regional migra­
tion, women, migrants' rights, etc.). This reflects 
the way in which local journalists deal with the 
issue, given the challenges they face. The 
project analyzed people' s access to informa­
tion on migration, particularly young people, 
and the way in which they determine their path. 
The analysis was carried out against the back­
ground of the COVI D-19 pandemic, which 
since March 2020 has had a strong impact on 
migration flows in Africa. 
Partner: RACECO Group 
I FIGUR ES SPEAK FOR T HEM SELVES 
_ _Journalists and media managers 
Students 
Media (TV, radio, print and 
online press) 
Artists 
Young people 
Editorial content produced and disseminated 1 500 journalists (67% male) 
350 (66% female students) 
700 (including 150 community radios) 
128 (63% men) 
250.000+ reached 
(TV, radio, print and online media) 2,000 
Activities 
National official languages 
Stakeholders (181} 93 (of which 83 national and 10 regional) 
80 
National and local authorities 42 
International organisations (including ECOWAS) 06 
Media organisations 33 
NGOs and civil society organisations 15 
Youth organisations 61 
Journalism schools 13 
Private sector actors 11 
UN ESCO Multi-sectoral Regional Office 
for West Africa-Sahel 
Dimitri Sanga, Director 
Communication and Information Section 
Michel E. Ken moe, Head of Section 
Joshua Massarenti, Project coordinator 
Leticia Ewane Epee, Alimatou Mbaye, Christian Correa 
Q Almadies, Route de la Plage de Ngor-PoBox: 3311 Dakar-SENEGAL 
(@ ( +221) 33 864 96 00 • Fax: ( +221) 33 820 23 42 
@ dakar@unesco.org 
S www,unesco,org/Dakar W @UNESCO Dakar 11 @UNESCODAK @ @UNESCO DAKAR 