A STEADY  
PATH FORWARD
UNESCO 2022 Report  
on Public Access to Information 
(SDG 16.10.2)
Published in 2023 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2023 
ISBN 978-92-3-100594-7
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/ ). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to 
be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository ( http://en.unesco.org/open-access/terms-
use-ccbysa-en ).
For the use of any material not clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be requested 
from: publication.copyright@unesco.org or UNESCO Publishing, 7 place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP 
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, 
city, or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of 
UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. The same disclaimer applies to commissioned UNESCO research 
cited in this study. 
This study should be cited as follows: A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to 
Information (SDG 16.10.2), Paris.
Researcher:
Andrey Richter, Professor at the Comenius University in Bratislava.
UNESCO Research team:
Jaco Du Toit, UNESCO Chief of the Section for Universal Access to Information, Marius Lukosiunas, UNESCO 
Communication & Information Advisor, Ingrid Mondet, UNESCO Consultant. 
Contributors:
Lida Ayoubi, Senior Lecturer, the Auckland University of Technology.
Graphic design, cover design and typeset:
Billy Anderson
Acknowledgements:
UNESCO wishes to thank the following partners that supported the UNESCO 2022 Survey on Public Access to 
Information in the preparation of this report: the International Conference of Information Commissioners (ICIC); 
Red de Transparencia y Acceso a la Informacion (RTA); Global Alliance for Reporting Progress on Peaceful, Just 
and Inclusive Societies; Marcos Mendiburu, UNESCO Consultant; national SDG focal points for data collection; and 
Permanent Delegations for UNESCO. 
This report is supported through the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC).
Printed in FranceSHORT SUMMARY
“Since wars begin in the minds of men and 
women it is in the minds of men and women 
that the defences of peace must be constructed”.As the UN custodian agency for Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) Indicator 16.10.2, UNESCO continues to report on 
progress on the adoption and the implementation of Access 
to Information guarantees. The 2022 report shed light on the 
relevance of access to information to the attainment of the 
SDG  as well as countering disinformation and 
balancing the right to information with 
the right to privacy. It also focuses on 
national and regional good practices, 
including Small Island Developing 
States.
“A Steady Path Forward” report 
captures these dimensions, presenting 
key findings from the 2022 UNESCO 
Survey on Public Access to Information 
and assessing progress in 123 participating 
countries and territories. It equips policymakers, civil society, 
academia and those interested in SDG issues with case studies 
and good practices, concentrating on reinforcing communities 
and public institutions with more access to information.The Path Forward for Public 
Access to Information
123
countries and territories 
participated in the
2022 survey on 
SDG16.10.2A STEADY   
PATH  FORWARD
UNE SCO 2022 Report  
on Publi c Access t o Info rmation 
(SDG 16.10. 2)Short Summary  3
Executive Summary  6
1. BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT  8
 1.1 Access to Information and Sustainable Development  9
 1.2 UNESCO and the monitoring and reporting on SDG Indicator  9 
  16.10.2
2. TRACKING PROGRESS ON SDG INDICATOR 16.10.2 IN  12 
 2022
 2.1 Global overview: Adoption of Access to Information legal  13 
  guarantees
 2.2 Mutual reinforcement of rights of access to information and to  14 
  privacy
 2.3 Highlights from 2022 UNESCO Survey on Public Access to  15 
  Information
3. ACCESS TO INFORMATION REPORTING IN  21 
 VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEWS
4. USING ACCESS TO INFORMATION TO ADVANCE THE  27 
 SDGS: CASE STUDIES AND GOOD PRACTICES
 4.1 Privacy rights in the digital world of Access to Information  28
 4.2 Focusing on Small Island Developing States  31 
 4.3 National Focus: Access to information in Armenia as an  32
  instrument to counter disinformation
 4.4 National Focus: Mandating proactive release of information in  33 
  Australia
Conclusion  35Table of Contents:6
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)Summary Executive
27
USAGE LOGO: COLOUR  VERSIONSDG LOGO FOR ENTITIES WITHIN UN SYSTEM
HORIZONTAL LOGOLOGO
The COLOUR VERSION of the Sustainable Development Goals logo 
is ONLY to be used on a white or light grey background. See colour 
values to the right. LIGHT GREY
PMS:  Cool Gray 1C
R 241 G 241 B 241
C 4 M 3 Y 3 K 0
Target 16.10:  
“Ensure public access to 
information and protect 
fundamental freedoms, in 
accordance with national 
legislation and international 
agreements.”
Indicator 16.10.2:
“Number of countries that adopt and implement 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for 
public access to information.”
* UNESCO as Custodian AgencyGoal 16:
“Promote peaceful and 
inclusive societies for 
sustainable development, 
provide access to justice 
for all and build effective, 
accountable and inclusive 
institutions at all levels and 
inclusive societies.”Although more and more countries and territories 
adopt constitutional, statutory and/or policy 
guarantees for public access to information, 
their practical implementation is still faced with 
various problems, often of a global scale. Risks and 
uncertainties posed by the current international 
context, such as climate change-induced drought 
and floods, which put pressure on food security, other 
man-made and natural disasters emerge to challenge 
the implementation of the national reforms and the 
achievement of development goals. 2
Tracking progress on access to information (or, ATI) in 
the past three years through legal guarantees and their 
implementation, shows an overall recognition of the 
role of access to information, as a critical instrument 
for development and protecting fundamental human 
rights. This is proven by the key findings from the 2022 
UNESCO Survey on Public Access to Information based 
on data collected from 123 countries and territories, 
and additional expertise. 
The report also offers case studies and good practices 
on privacy protection in the context of the digital 
transformation and existing access to information 
standards, as reflected in the questions of the survey on 
SDG Indicator 16.10.2. It includes a discussion on the role 
of private entities, digital accessibility of information, 
the use of artificial intelligence and Internet-of-things 
and the processing of personal data.
The case of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 
is presented, explaining the issues at stake for the 
adoption and the implementation of regimes favorable 
to access to information in SIDS specifically. It points to 
inadequate resources and lack of budgetary support 
as deterrents on the way to transparency of public 
institutions.
From national perspectives, two case studies are put 
forward. One case study focuses on Armenia and the 
role of access to information to counter disinformation. 
Another case study focuses on Australia and the 
importance of proactive disclosure of government 
information, as a means to ensure transparency and 
accountability. 
 2  See: Ethiopia 2022 VNR, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/
VNR%202022%20Ethiopia%20Report_1.pdf ; and The Gambia 2022 
VNR, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/VNR%202022%20
Gambia%20Main%20Messages.pdf7
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)Summary Executive
As the UN custodian agency for SDG Indicator 
16.10.2, UNESCO continues to report on progress on 
the adoption and the implementation of Access 
to Information legal guarantees worldwide. This 
year’s survey used the same methodology as the 
one approved by the UN’s Inter-Agency and Expert 
Group on the Sustainable Development Goal 
Indicators (IAEG-SDGs). The survey itself comprises 8 
questions3, each with values between 0 and 2. Upon 
the completion of the survey, a country can get a total 
score of 0-9, enabling it to track progress over time. 
The total score of each country is the basis for global 
analysis of trends as reported here and is not assigned 
to any level category (e.g.: low, medium, or high). 
Launched in April 2022, the survey engaged responses 
by 123 countries and territories, an increase by 
20.6% compared to the previous year. This positive 
phenomenon demonstrates a continued interest 
in reporting on access to information within the 
framework of the SDGs. 
The 2022 survey also yielded insights into the main 
features in the implementation of legal guarantees for 
public access to information worldwide. 
Data collected confirms the overall existence of a 
limited scope of exemptions for protected interests, 
that are explicitly mentioned in the national Access to 
Information guarantees, but the number for countries 
and territories that keep disaggregated data on 
refusals to Access to Information requests on the basis 
of exceptions is still not sufficient. 
Looking at the data related to independence of the 
oversight bodies, a significant change in the reporting 
process can be observed: the recipient of the oversight 
reports is increasingly the legislative rather than the 
executive branch of power, the legislatures are also to 
approve the budget for oversight activities, while the 
appointment of the head of the oversight institution is 
more often made by the executive. As to the mandated role of the oversight institution, 
one can distinguish a significant drop in the proportion 
of countries and territories that require them to publish 
an annual report, to provide implementation guidance 
to the public officials, to engage in raising public 
awareness and even to keep statistics. 
Finally, a stable and significant proportion of all requests 
for information – about three quarters – being granted 
can be observed from the survey submissions in both 
2021 and 2022. However, this observation is based on 
a rather small number of countries and territories that 
provided statistics on the numbers of actual requests 
submitted. 
The annual UNESCO survey, which provides a 
standardized approach to monitoring SDG 16.10.2, has 
proven useful for countries in measuring and reporting 
progress at the national level, including in their 
Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) of progress made 
on the SDGs. In this regard, this report also presents 
an analysis of countries’ reporting on SDG 16.10.2 in the 
VNRs from 2019 to 2022. 
While 135 UN Member States have statutory guarantees 
for public access to information, the remaining states 
that have not adopted such guarantees could learn 
from the trends and good practices encompassed in 
this report. It can also help countries and territories 
confronted with new global challenges to build public 
trust, strengthen their institutions, improve public 
service delivery and address corruption.
With less than eight years left to achieve the SDGs 
by 2030, and with global challenges becoming more 
interconnected, the message stays clear that access 
to information is a central driver for the successful 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
3 The questions are based on “Principles of Access to Information”, and 
which highlight essential components for effective implementation of 
access to information at the country level. These Principles are synthesized 
from existing frameworks and documents recognized internationally and 
include Article 10 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption; 
resolutions of the UN General Assembly and Human Rights Council; the 
Commonwealth’s Model Freedom of Information Bill; Organization of 
American States (OAS)’s Model Law on Access to Information; African 
Union’s Model Law on Access to Information and reports from the UN 
the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to 
freedom of opinion and expression.01
BACKGROUND 
AND CONTEXT
‘Access to reliable information saves lives. Misinformation and rumours 
can cost them. This simple lesson is one we have learnt to our detriment 
in recent years. Whether fighting a global pandemic or supporting public 
debate, we need free, reliable and independent information as the 
foundation upon which democratic societies are built.’
Ms Audrey Azoulay , Director-General of UNESCO, on the occasion of the International Day for 
Universal Access to Information 28 September 20219
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)1.1. Access to Information and 
Sustainable Development
Conceptually, ‘public access to information’ refers to 
an effective system to meet citizens’ rights to seek 
and receive information, particularly that held by or 
on behalf of public authorities. Access to information 
has been recognized as a key element of sustainable 
development since the adoption of the Rio Declaration 
at the ‘Earth Summit’ in 1992.4
In 2015, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development5 
acknowledged access to information as a necessary 
enabling mechanism for transparent, accountable 
and participatory governance, the rule of law and 
peaceful societies. It was epitomized by Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG) number 16: ‘Peace, Justice 
and Strong Institutions’. Target 16.10 calls for states 
to “ensure public access to information and protect 
fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national 
legislation and international agreements”. 
The Human Rights Council in its 2020 resolution on 
freedom of opinion and expression recognizes that 
“public authorities should strive to make information 
available, whether the information is proactively 
published electronically or provided upon request...”.6 
On 10 January 2022, during the 49th session of the UN 
Human Rights Council, the first report by the Office 
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR) on access to information held by public 
bodies was presented.7 It constitutes authoritative 
guidance to state actors on the developments of laws 
and policies on matters affecting this right. The text 
of the report focuses on good practices including the 
elements in the design of access to information laws, 
capacity building and other measures to ensure their 
effective implementation.
The Windhoek+30 Declaration8 was adopted on 3 May 
2021, during the global celebration event of the World 
Press Freedom Day, affirming the need to uphold 
4 https://www.un.org/en/conferences/environment/rio1992
5 Adopted in 2015 by all 193 UN member states, the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development ( https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/
post2015/transformingourworld/publication ) is a 15-year plan of action 
“to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure prosperity for all, while 
strengthening universal peace in larger freedom”.
6	 UN	Human	Rights	Council,	Resolution	‘Freedom	of	opinion	and	expression’,	
16 July 2020, A/HRC/RES/44/12,  
https://undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2FHRC%2FRES%2F44%2F 
12&Language=E &DeviceType=Desktop&LangRequested=False
7 https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3956409
8 Windhoek + 30 Declaration: information as a public good, World Press 
Freedom Day 2021, https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf00003781589 The survey comprises 8 questions, each of them values between 0 and 2. 
Upon the completion of the survey, a country can get a total score of 0-9, 
enabling it to track progress over time.information as a public good that serves as a shared 
resource for the whole of humanity. Emphasizing the 
importance of press freedom, independence and 
pluralism to guarantee access to information, the 
Declaration also sets out recommendations to secure 
information as a public good by addressing media 
viability, promoting Internet company transparency 
and enhancing citizens’ media and information literacy 
competencies.
Within the perspective of the 2030 Agenda, access to 
information remains critical for empowering the public 
to make informed decisions, holding governments 
accountable, evaluating public officials in implementing 
and monitoring the SDGs, and facilitating effective 
public participation.
1.2. UNESCO and the monitoring 
and reporting on SDG 
Indicator 16.10.2
Standard-setting on monitoring and reporting
Following the approval of the SDG framework in 2017 
by the UN General Assembly, UNESCO was designated 
as the custodian agency for Indicator 16.10.2. Under 
this mandate, UNESCO monitors and reports to the 
UN Secretary-General each year on “the number of 
countries that adopt and implement constitutional, 
statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access 
to information”, giving attention to both components: 
“adoption” and “implementation”.
UNESCO continues to report not only on progress on 
the adoption and the implementation of access to 
information guarantees worldwide, but also promotes 
capacity development efforts around the issue. 
UNESCO uses a scoring system9 to enable global 
analysis of the results. For example, the analysis of data 
collected in 2022, shows that countries and territories 
with legal guarantees on Access to Information that 
include the provision for an oversight institution – have 
an average score of 7.2, while those with Access to 
Information guarantees but no oversight institution 
score on average 3.3 points. This finding suggests that 
countries and territories that have a specialized Access 10
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)to Information oversight institution are generally 
likely to perform better while implementing access 
to information legal framework in comparison with 
those without an oversight institution or those where 
framework is implemented just by the judiciary. 
In its 2020 Decision on Monitoring and Reporting of 
SDG Indicator 16.10.2, the Intergovernmental Council 
of UNESCO’s International Programme for the 
Development of Communication (IPDC) encouraged 
Member States to enhance legal regulatory 
frameworks on access to information at the national 
level as well as the effective implementation of these 
frameworks, as part of their commitments to advance 
the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development. The 
Council encouraged Member States to respond to 
‘UNESCO’s annual survey, and to engage – where 
applicable – the oversight bodies responsible for 
access to information in the collection of data’.10
In 2021 and 2022, UNESCO invited all UN Member 
States to participate in annual surveys on SDG 
Indicator 16.10.2. To help establish a reporting link for 
SDG 16.10.2 at the national level, UNESCO sent the 
2022 survey invitation to both the central oversight 
institutions responsible for access to information (e.g., 
information commission/er; data protection or privacy 
commission/er; national human rights institution; 
ombuds institution; department/ ministry/ agency) 
and national SDG focal points (usually the national 
statistics offices). In some countries and territories, the 
invitation was sent to only one of these entities, due 
the absence of one or another. 
UNESCO also joined forces with networks of oversight 
institutions responsible for access to information, 
such as the International Conference of Information 
Commissioners (ICIC) and regional associations: 
Red de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información  
(RTA, the Regional Network of Access to Information 
Practitioners in Latin America and the Caribbean) and 
the African Network of Information Commissioners 
(ANIC), to increase participation of countries and 
territories in the survey. Such outreach is important as 
these networks play an important role in advocating 
for SDG monitoring and reporting, as well as mobilizing 
their members in taking part in global-wide activities 
related to the SDGs. 
10 Thirty-second session of the Intergovernmental Council of the International 
Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC) Decisions, 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374994/PDF/374994eng.pdf.
multiIt is equally important to strengthen the involvement 
of civil society in the monitoring and reporting on 
SDG 16.10.2. While the UNESCO survey provides 
an opportunity for governments to make a self-
assessment against their own performance, monitoring 
and reporting by civil society can offer alternative 
data and perspective. Having a direct access to the 
grassroots level, civil society can also help ensure that 
women and vulnerable groups, including persons with 
disabilities, are included in the Access to Information 
agenda. The IPDC supported project entitled Voces 
del Sur: Monitoring safety of journalist and access to 
information in Colombia in the framework of SDG 
16.10.1 and 16.10.2 serves as an example.
Capacity-building and awareness raising
In the 2020 Decision of the IPDC Council, the IPDC 
Bureau was encouraged to ‘continue supporting 
grass-roots projects that will help Member States in 
data-collection and reporting on SDG indicator 16.10.2 
on access to information, including strengthening 
monitoring and reporting capacities of oversight 
bodies responsible for access to information’.11 
In this respect, efforts have been made to assist 
Member States in advancing the right to information. 
In cooperation with the International Conference of 
Information Commissioners, UNESCO presented at its 
13th meeting in Puebla, Mexico from 22 to 24 June 2022 
a self-paced online course developed with the Centre 
for Law and Democracy (Canada) and explored 
possibilities to reinforce a wide range of stakeholders’ 
capacities on access to information laws and policies. 
UNESCO also supported Information Commissioners 
from Africa to participate in the meeting and is working 
with the commissioners to finalize the African Network 
of Information Commissioners (ANIC) statutory 
documents and outreach efforts. 
Additional support has been provided to facilitate 
capacity development initiatives and awareness 
raising efforts in several countries, such as, Ethiopia, 
Ghana, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Paraguay, Samoa, 
Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Thailand and 
Tunisia.12 Examples of such initiatives include, providing 
capacity-building assistance to the information 
commission of South Sudan to develop training 
11 Thirty-second session of the Intergovernmental Council of the International 
Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC), Decisions, 
25-26 November 2020. Item 12, para 3, p. 19. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000374994
12 While activities in the Latin American region were mostly carried out 
through a regional approach, UNESCO is also supporting national initiatives, 
for example in Honduras and in Mexico11
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)manuals on access to information and launching an 
advocacy project to draft a policy that will lead to 
the preparation of access to information legislation in 
Samoa.13
The IPDC Council, in both the 201814 and 202015 decisions 
on monitoring SDG indicator 16.10.2, appreciating 
Voluntary National Reports (VNRs) to the UN General 
Assembly which have included analysis based on 
Indicator 16.10.2, further encouraged Member States 
to continue monitoring and reporting progress on 
SDG indicator 16.10.2 through forthcoming VNRs. In this 
regard, participating in the UNESCO Survey on Public 
Access to Information has been proven to be useful 
for countries and territories as they can repurpose 
the data submitted to the survey for their VNRs. For 
instance, Eswatini, Ghana, Greece, Jordan, Liberia, 
Malawi, and Sao Tome and Principe have used the 
data collected through the survey to report on their 
Access to Information progress in their VNRs in 2022. 
UNESCO also commissioned in 2022, guidelines 
for information commissioners on ‘The Universal 
Periodic Review and its potential to foster access to 
information’,16 which provide practical advice on how 
to use the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) exercise 
to promote the right of access to public information. 
Another policy brief, ‘Access to information laws: 
a guarantee of inclusion and disability rights: Issue 
brief’,17 published in 2022, provides an analysis of 
the inclusion of persons with disabilities in Access to 
Information legislations across the globe, based on 
the existing Access to Information laws in 132 countries 
and territories. The report further presents a series of 
recommendations to advance the rights of persons 
with disabilities within the scope of the right of access 
to information. Another policy brief was developed 
on ‘Promoting gender equity in the right of access to 
information’,18 focusing on how women can effectively 
exercise their right of access to information. With a 
specific focus on gender parity, the brief investigates 
international and national mechanisms to help 
13 Freedom of opinion and expression. Report of the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2022. Para 42. https://
digitallibrary.un.org/record/3956409
14 https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000266235
15 https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374994/PDF/374994eng.pdf.
multi
16 Legault, Suzanne, The Universal Periodic Review and its potential to foster 
access to information: guidelines for information commissioners, Paris: 
UNESCO, 2022, https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380590?posI
nSet=5&queryId=436adf20-a075-4a8a-9117-1ea4f766dad7  
17 Ayoubi, Lida, Access to information laws: a guarantee of inclusion and 
disability rights: Issue brief, Paris: UNESCO, 2022, https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000380470_eng
18 Neuman, Laura, Promoting gender equity in the right of access to 
information, Paris: UNESCO, 2022, https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000381684_eng19 See: https://en.unesco.org/commemorations/accesstoinformationday/2021/  
and https://en.unesco.org/news/iduai-2021-urgent-need-expand-access-
information-laws-and-their-effective-implementationovercome the obstacles that women face in exercising 
their right to information.
Within the framework of UNESCO’s Communication 
and Information programme aimed to strengthen 
the right to information, the development of updated 
Policy Guidelines for the Development and Promotion 
of Governmental Public Domain Information is 
ongoing. The new version of the Guidelines is to be 
developed to strengthen national frameworks of 
Access to Information and their implementation by 
assisting countries and stakeholders in assessing the 
compatibility of their national Access to Information 
legal and policy framework with international standard-
setting instruments on the right to information and 
considering SDG 16.10.2 national commitments. These 
Guidelines are meant to be strictly advisory; they are 
not intended as a prescriptive or normative instrument.
The annual celebration of the International Day for 
Universal Access to Information on 28 September 
constitutes a keystone of UNESCO’s awareness raising 
efforts on access to information. The Day continues 
to provide a platform for UNESCO to discuss key 
findings of data collection on SDG 16.10.2, as well as 
to disseminate takeaways from studies on access to 
information and cross-cutting issues, such as gender 
equality and inclusion of persons with disabilities. In 
2021, the theme of the International Day for Universal 
Access to Information highlighted the role of access 
to information laws and their implementation to 
build back strong institutions for the public good and 
sustainable development, as well as to strengthen the 
right to information and international cooperation in 
the field of implementing this human right.1902
TRACKING 
PROGRESS ON 
SDG INDICATOR 
16.10.2 IN 2022
 ‘At UNESCO, we firmly believe that access to information must be recognized as a pillar 
of sustainable development, and as a prerequisite for the promotion and protection 
of all human rights. As we adapt our societies to face common challenges, the right to 
information must be at the centre of efforts to ensure a more informed and resilient 
tomorrow.’
Ms Audrey Azoulay , Director-General of UNESCO, on the occasion of the International Day for 
Universal Access to Information 28 September 202113
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)Global overview: Adoption of Access to Information 
legal guarantees2.1.
Progress has been recorded in terms of binding laws and policies giving individuals a right to access information 
held by public authorities with 135 UN Member States that have adopted access to information laws (see Figure 
1). In total, 25 countries and territories have adopted access to information laws and four have adopted decrees/
regulations since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda in 2015.20
20 Information from email by David Banisar, Article 19.
21 Based on information from Global Right to Information Rating by the Centre for Law and Democracy, https://www.rti-rating.org/country-data/
22 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018. 
23 Lichtenstein is not a member of UNESCO.
24 The United States of America withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 2018.Europe and North America (51)
Latin America and the Caribbean (26)
Asia and the Pacific (27)
Africa (23)
Arab States (8)1. Albania
2. Andorra
3. Armenia
4. Austria
5. Azerbaijan
6. Belarus
7. Belgium
8. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
9. Bulgaria
10. Canada
11. Croatia
1. Antigua and 
Barbuda
2. Argentina
3. Bahamas
4. Belize 
5. Bolivia (Plurinational 
State of)
1. Afghanistan
2. Australia
3. Bangladesh
4. China
5. Cook Islands
6. Fiji 
1. Angola
2. Benin
3. Burkina Faso
4. Côte d’Ivoire
5. Ethiopia
1. Jordan
2. Kuwait13. Czechia
14. Denmark
15. Estonia
16. Finland
17. France
18. Georgia
19. Germany
20. Greece
21. Hungary
22. Iceland
23. Ireland
24. Israel22
6. Brazil
7. Chile
8. Colombia
9. Costa Rica
10. Dominican Republic
11. Ecuador 
12. El Salvador
7. India
8. Indonesia
9. Iran (Islamic 
Republic of)
10. Japan
11. Kazakhstan
6. Gambia
7. Ghana
8. Guinea
9. Kenya
10. Liberia
3. Lebanon
4. Morocco 25. Italy
26. Latvia
27. Liechtenstein23
28. Lithuania
29. Luxembourg
30. Malta 
31. Monaco
32. Montenegro
33. Netherlands
34. North Macedonia
35. Norway
36. Poland
13. Guatemala
14. Guyana
15. Honduras
16. Jamaica
17. Mexico
18. Nicaragua
19. Panama
12. Kyrgyzstan
13. Maldives
14. Mongolia
15. Nepal
16. New Zealand
17. Pakistan 
11. Malawi
12. Mozambique
13. Niger
14. Nigeria
15. Rwanda
5. Saudi Arabia
6. Sudan 37. Portugal
38. Republic of 
Moldova
39. Romania
40. Russian Federation
41. San Marino
42. Serbia
43. Slovakia
44. Slovenia
45. Spain 
46. Sweden
47. Switzerland
20. Paraguay
21. Peru
22. Saint Kitts and 
Nevis
23. Saint Vincent and 
the Grenadines
18. Palau
19. Philippines
20. Republic of Korea
21. Sri Lanka
22. Tajikistan
23. Thailand
16. Seychelles
17. Sierra Leone
18. South Africa
19. South Sudan
20. Togo
7. Tunisia
8. Yemen48. Türkiye
49. Ukraine
50. United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
51. United States of 
America24
24. Trinidad and 
Tobago
25. Uruguay
26. Venezuela 
(Bolivarian Republic 
of)
24. Timor-Leste
25. Uzbekistan
26. Vanuatu
27. Viet Nam
21. Uganda
22. United Republic of 
Tanzania
23. ZimbabweFIGURE 1. UN Member States that have adopted statutory guarantees for public access to information 
(grouped based on the execution of regional activities by UNESCO)2114
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)In 2022, three countries, Andorra, Gambia and 
Venezuela, reported to UNESCO that they passed and 
enforced their national laws on access to information 
in 2021, but after the publication of the UNESCO 2021 
Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2). 
The Netherlands reported that the new Open 
Government Act ( Wet open overheid ) replaced, on 1 
May 2022, the Freedom of Information Act, and contains 
a number of changes, including the establishment of 
the permanent independent Advisory committee on 
public access and information management.
Five countries in the UNESCO survey indicated an 
absence of any access to information guarantees, 
including one country (Palestine) noting that the right 
is only “indirectly mentioned in some legislation (Law 
No. 9 (1995) on publications and publishing and the 
General Statistics Law No. 4 (2000), Law No. 7 (1999) 
on the environment). Articles in theses legislations 
required the publication of certain information to the 
public.” Another country (Singapore) acknowledged 
having a non-binding policy on access to information 
by saying that “[i]n June 2013, the Infocomm Media 
Development Authority of Singapore (IMDA) and the 
Ministry of Finance jointly released a statement that 
the Government will make more Government data 
available to the public.” 
Efforts are currently underway in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Madagascar, Samoa, and 
Senegal towards the adoption of access to information 
legislation. 
In the summer of 2022, both chambers of the 
Parliament in Namibia have also passed an Access to 
Information Bill to be signed into law by the President.252.2.Mutual reinforcement 
of rights of access to 
information and to 
privacy26
The need to consider the rights to privacy and of access 
to information as complementary rights, rather than 
opposing ones was stressed at a first training workshop 
for privacy commissioners from Africa, Arab region, 
Asia and Latin America. Co-organized by UNESCO, in 
partnership with the Global Privacy Assembly (GPA) 
and the National Institute for Transparency, Access to 
Information and Personal Data Protection of Mexico 
(INAI), the training took place in Uruguay within the 
framework of the 2022 World Press Freedom Day 
Conference.27  This need can be also detected in the 
2022 survey results. There is an increase of the number 
of countries and territories where the oversight of the 
access to information procedures is entrusted to a 
data protection or privacy commission(-er) and/or 
to a converged body that combines both the data/
privacy protection function and access to information 
oversight (see Figure 3).
25	See:	Vatileni,	Eino,	‘Namibia:	Information	Bill	Sails	Through	National	Council’,	
The Namibian, 18 August 2022, https://allafrica.com/stories/202208230377.
html26 In part extracted from: Doneda, Danilo, Guidelines for Judicial Actors on 
Privacy and Data Protection, Paris: UNESCO, 2022, https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000381298 , and a study Right to Access to Information 
and the Right to Privacy commissioned by UNESCO to Lida Ayoubi, PhD, 
Senior Lecturer at the School of Law Auckland University of Technology, 
New Zealand. For the purpose of this Report, only the most relevant 
findings are presented.
27 https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/unesco-organizes-first-training-
privacy-commissioners-privacy-right-data-protection-and-freedomFIGURE 3. Countries and territories where access 
to information oversight is combined with privacy 
protection
Data protection or privacy commission/er
A converged body that combines data/privacy 
protection and ATI
Number of countries and territories (percentage, based on the 
total number of countries with oversight bodies)12%
23%16%
26%2021
20212022
20229
1816
2715
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)28 https://en.unesco.org/news/iduai-2021-urgent-need-expand-access-
information-laws-and-their-effective-implementationIn total, out of the countries and territories that 
responded to the UNESCO survey in 2022 and have 
constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for 
access to information, 91 percent indicated availability 
of permissible exceptions from these guarantees in 
case of privacy protection.
Several challenges exist for effective mutual 
reinforcement of the two rights by protecting privacy 
and maximizing access to information. First, it is 
evident that a comprehensive and sufficiently precise 
and efficient framework for balancing the restriction 
of access to information on the basis of protection of 
privacy interests works when taking into account the 
role of the public interest in that balance. 
Second, appropriate training for administrative and 
judicial authorities is to be provided to ensure that they 
strike the right balance when maneuvering the overlap 
of the access to information and right to privacy. 
Third, it is important that relevant guidelines are 
widely available about the procedures, storage and 
availability to the public of personal data, as well as the 
available legal and other measures for the protection 
of individuals’ privacy.2.3.Highlights from 2022 
UNESCO Survey 
on Public Access to 
Information
2.3.1 Legal frameworks for Access 
to Information: growth of countries 
reporting on legal and policy 
guarantees for access to information
Out of the total number of 123 countries and territories 
that responded to the survey in 2022, 93% (114)  
indicated that they have constitutional, statutory and/
or policy guarantees for access to information. In 2021, 
out of the 102 respondent countries and territories, 
89% or 91  countries and territories indicated having 
such guarantees.
Out of the 114 countries and territories with access to 
information guarantees, 90% (103) reported in 2022 
that these provisions specify the need of a dedicated 
oversight institution(-s). As many as 79% (90) pointed 
that these guarantees specifically provide for the need 
for public bodies (ministry/agency/department) to 
appoint public information officers or a specific unit to 
handle access to information. Out of the 90, 89% (80) 
said that these requirements are for all public bodies, 
while the rest – only to some of the bodies. Implementation [of laws] is where 
things are falling down. And that’s 
why it’s absolutely critical to have 
independent commissioners or an 
oversight body that can ensure that 
things are actually moving forward, 
that governments are putting things 
into place, that it doesn’t stop at the 
law, that it goes into implementation 
so that people actually have the 
ability to have someone to turn to if 
those rights are not being realized 
in practice. Without having someone 
looking at the store, nothing happens.
Quinn McKew , Executive Director of Article 1928FIGURE 4. Number of countries and territories that 
participated in UNESCO survey exercise in 2020-
2022
69
2020 2021 2022102 12316
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)The current phenomenon is a steady growth of both 
the number and the proportion of national regulation 
systems conducive to access to information as evident 
from the surveys. These systems largely include the 
need for an oversight body and a requirement for the 
public bodies to appoint officers handling access to 
information issues.
2.3.2. Exemptions: limited scope, but 
overall existence to protect public 
interests and human rights
Out of the 114 responding countries and territories 
with access to information legal guarantees, 96% 
(110) reported that their respective legal guarantees 
explicitly mention having permissible exemptions 
that are elaborated in well-defined categories and 
terms of which certain requests for information may 
be legally denied. Figure 5 shows the proportion of 
permissible exemptions in access to information legal 
guarantees, as indicated by the respondents.Certain types of metadata, when aggregated, can 
reveal personal information that can be no less 
sensitive than the actual content of requests or appeals 
and can give an insight into an individual’s behaviour, 
including someone’s movements, social relationships, 
political activities, private preferences and identity. 
Keeping the data disaggregated prevents such risks. 
Therefore, access to information oversight institutions 
in 28 out of 44 countries and territories that provided 
specific data on ‘Access to Information requests’ in 
2021 reported that they indeed kept data on the 
reasons for non-disclosure and partial disclosure on 
the basis of the legitimate exemptions disaggregated. 
As it relates to specific data on ‘Appeals’ in the same 
period, 33 out of 60 respondents reported that they 
kept disaggregated data (see Figure 6).
FIGURE 5. Permissible exemptions in Access to 
Information legal guarantees (in percentage)FIGURE 6. Countries and territories that keep 
disaggregated data for non-disclosure and partial 
disclosure based on the permissible exemptions in 
2021
96%
67%
28
55%
3333%
16
45%
2768%
58%
82%
91%
77%
40%
54%
23%
46%National security
International relations
Public health and safety
Prevention, investigation 
and prosecution of legal 
wrongs
Privacy
Legitimate commercial 
and other economic 
interests
Management of the 
economy
Fair administration of 
justice & legal advice 
privilege
Conservation of the 
environment
Legitimate policy making 
and other operations of 
public bodiesAccess to 
Information 
Request
Appeals
Countries and territories keeping disaggregated data
Countries and territories not keeping disaggregated data17
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)These data confirm the overall existence of a limited 
scope of exemptions for protected interests: human 
rights (such as privacy) and public interests (such as 
national security), that are explicitly mentioned in the 
national access to information guarantees. At the 
same time, the number of countries and territories 
that keep data disaggregated on refusals to requests 
for information on the basis of exceptions is still low. 
2.3.3. Oversight mechanism: growth in 
numbers and broadness of mandates to 
implement the laws
Oversight mechanisms may take the form of an 
institution tasked with ensuring the process of 
supervision, monitoring, evaluation of performance 
and review to ensure compliance with laws, 
regulations and policies. They are an essential element 
to ensure accountability for the implementation of 
access to information. The same or another body 
may also review appeals, although hearing appeals 
is a distinct function from oversight and is often done 
by a separate body. While judicial review is typically 
available, it is ‘often not serving the oversight function 
well’, in particular, because the court ‘is an incredibly 
slow dispute resolution process’.29 Therefore, in some 
countries and territories, there exists more than one 
oversight institution, depending on the different tasks 
that they perform.
In 2022, out of the 114 responding countries and 
territories with access to information guarantees, 90% 
(103) reported that these legal guarantees specify 
the need of a dedicated oversight institution(-s). In 
2021, 87% (79) of the 91 countries and territories with 
access to information guarantees confirmed that their 
guarantees recognized such a need. 
Today, Information Commission/ers are the most 
common type of oversight mechanism (47), followed by 
governmental departments/ministries/agencies (33) 
and ombudspersons/institutions (29). Other oversight 
mechanisms include converged bodies that combine 
data/privacy protection and Access to Information (27), data protection or privacy commission/ers (16), 
and the human rights commissions (10). In 22 cases, 
the reports of the countries and territories with Access 
to Information guarantees pointed to “Other” in the list 
of oversight institutions (see Figure 7).30
In the majority of countries and territories, these 
oversight institutions reportedly operate at the 
national level, with only few of them – typically 
federative states – indicating the existence (also) of 
the subnational level.
FIGURE 7. Types of oversight institution
29 Karanicolas, Michael & Kwoka, Margaret B., Overseeing Oversight, 
Connecticut Law Review , Volume 54, May 2022, Number 3, p. 673.30 A detailed review of their answers, though, discovers some 
misunderstanding as the other institutions turned out also to be 
information commissions under a different name (board, council, authority 
and agency), “personal data authorities”, government bodies, other than 
the ministries and departments, as well as courts and prosecution which 
anyway have a general right to overview compliance with a law. In two 
cases noted was that in 2022 the Access to Information oversight is done 
by a media regulator (Media Commission and Office of the Inspector of 
Journalist Ethics).46% 47
33
29
27
16
10
2232%
28%
26%
16%
10%
21%Information Commission/
er 
Department/Ministry/
Agency
Ombudsperson/
institution
A converged body that 
combines data/privacy 
protection and Access to 
Information
Data protection or 
privacy commission/er
Human Rights 
Commission
Other18
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)The mandates of the oversight institutions in 91 out of 
the 103 countries and territories that provide for them, 
according to their 2022 submissions to UNESCO, 
authorize the oversight bodies to conduct an oversight 
(legal responsibility to ensure implementation of the 
Access to Information guarantee). The same number 
– conduct monitoring of access to information 
implementation.31 Review of the appeals is reportedly 
possible by 80 oversight Access to Information 
institutions, while the same number of oversight 
bodies have the authority to enforce compliance with 
the access to information legal guarantee(s). Just 43 
countries and territories reported that their institutions 
might take the role of mediation, an alternative solution 
to resolve a dispute before proceeding to any formal 
procedure, on Access to Information issues (see Figure 
8).
Oversight and monitoring of the implementation of 
the access to information legal guarantees remain the 
prime task of the oversight institutions in the majority 
of countries and territories that responded to the 
survey. Other important tasks cited by respondents 
are the review of appeals and the enforcement of 
compliance. Mediation is still largely undeveloped as a 
mandated role of such bodies.2.3.4. Oversight mechanism: recipient 
of the oversight reports and budget-
approver is increasingly the legislative, 
while the appointment of the head of 
the oversight institution is more often 
made by the executive
The independence of oversight institutions is essential 
for them to play an effective role. Factors such as the 
appointment process of the head of the oversight 
institution, the way the institution is financed, and to 
whom it reports, determine the independence of the 
oversight body. 
The survey revealed that out of the 103 countries and 
territories with access to information legal guarantees 
that specify the need of a dedicated oversight 
institution(-s), the majority (63) indicate that the head  
of the access to information oversight institution is 
appointed  by the ‘Executive’.32 The ‘Legislative’ branch 
is the second most answered (36), followed with ‘Other’ 
(21)’33 and ‘Judiciary’ (3).
In response to the survey question about the approval 
of the budget  for the access to information oversight 
institution, 62 respondents indicated that this budget 
is approved by the ’Legislative’ branch, while 47 
indicated that it is approved by the ’Executive’, and 
three indicated that it is approved by the ’Judiciary’. 
Meanwhile, 12 countries indicated ‘Other’ in their 
responses, explaining, for example, that the budget 
of the Access to Information institution comes from 
that of the Ministry of Justice, or is approved through 
a complex procedure involving different stakeholders. 
In response to the survey question about to whom 
the Access to Information oversight institution directly 
reports about its activities34, 68 respondents indicated 
that the budget is approved by the ’Legislative’ 
branch, while 49 indicated that it is approved by the 
’Executive’, and four indicated that it is approved by 
the ’Judiciary’, while 19 indicated ‘Other’. For the latter, 
some respondents said that the institution reports 
to “the public”, while others explained they do not 
report to any branches of state power. Further, several 
countries and territories either put “government”, a 
specific “ministry” or “parliament” under ‘Other’ (see 
Figure 9).
32 For this question, respondents could choose one or more branches of 
government, as applicable.
33 Such as the Head of State or an elaborate procedure involving several 
branches of power.
34 For this question, respondents could choose one or more branches of 
government, as applicable.88%
88%
78%
78%
42%Oversight (legal responsibility to 
ensure implementation of the Access 
to Information guarantees)
Monitoring of Access to Information 
implementation
Review of the appeals
Enforcement of compliance with the 
Access to Information guarantee(s)
MediationFIGURE 8. Roles of Access to Information oversight 
institutions as mandated by the legal guarantees
91
91
80
80
43
31 For this question, respondents could choose one or more branches of 
government, as applicable.19
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)Looking at the data related to independence of the 
oversight bodies, a significant change can be observed 
in the reporting process since the previous report. The 
recipient of the oversight reports is increasingly the 
legislative rather than the executive branch of power, 
the legislatures are also specified as approving the 
budget for oversight activities, while the appointment 
of the head of the oversight institution is more often 
made by the executive.In response to the survey question whether reporting 
on the activities performed by such institution(-s) is 
required, 98 out of the 103 countries and territories with 
Access to Information guarantees for a dedicated 
oversight institution(-s) indicated a positive reply to the 
question, but only 83 countries and territories said that 
an annual report was indeed published in 2021.
On the survey question about the types of activities 
performed by the dedicated access to information 
oversight institutions, the respondents indicated that 
these bodies provided implementation guidance 
and/or offered training to officials from public bodies 
(ministry/agency/department) in 84 cases; were 
engaged in activities to raise public awareness – in 
87 cases; kept statistics on requests and/or appeals – 
in 82 cases; and/or requested public bodies to keep 
statistics of their activities and decisions – in 65 cases 
(see Figure 10). 
However, there is a caveat here. Some countries and 
territories that reported on keeping statistics did not 
provide specific data to UNESCO in their response to 
the relevant questions. On the other hand, few others 
reported that they did not keep statistics, but still 
provided specific data in their reports. This may speak 
of some inconsistencies in record-keeping practices.FIGURE 9. Appointment, financing and reporting of 
Access to Information institutions
35%
60%
66%61%
46%
48%3%
3%
4%20%
12%
18%Who appointed the Head of Access to Information 
oversight institution(-s)?
Who approved the budget of Access to 
Information oversight institution(-s)?
To whom Access to Information oversight 
institution(-s) reports on its activities?Legislative
Legislative
LegislativeExecutive
Executive
ExecutiveJudiciary
Judiciary
JudiciaryOther
Other
Other36
62
6863
47
493
3
421
12
19FIGURE 10. Activities of Access to Information 
oversight institutions
81%
82%
84%
80%
63%83
84
87
82
65Publish an annual report
Provide implementation 
guidance and/or offer 
training to officials from 
public bodies 
Activities to raise public 
awareness
Keep statistics on 
requests and/or appeals
Request public bodies 
to keep statistics of their 
activities and decisions20
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)03A number of survey responses pointed to other activities 
of the access to information oversight institutions, such 
as proactive publication of information, for example 
minutes of Cabinet meetings; facilitation of access 
to people with disabilities; establishing transparency 
platforms; strengthening public awareness on Covid-19 
vaccination. These activities can also be considered 
good practices in terms of Access to Information 
standards.
In addition, good practices with regard to promoting 
gender equality in access to information were 
described in 24 reports in 2022. These included 
such activities as implementing action plans and 
specific policies on gender mainstreaming, as well 
as awareness raising through seminars and other 
programmatic activities. 
Some of the reports from Latin America provided more 
detailed answers. For example, in El Salvador, a Letter 
of Understanding was signed between the Attorney 
General’s Office and the Institute for Access to Public 
Information (IAIP) aimed to strengthen women’s rights 
on access to information within the framework of the 
“Citizen Participation and Comptrollership, Related 
to Inclusion and Gender” project. The IAIP held a 
workshop with women’s organizations to articulate 
a roadmap on transparency, gender and access to 
information. In Colombia, the institutional commitment 
‘Incorporation of actions for the inclusion of women 
in the strategy of access to public information of 
the Attorney General’s Office’ was adopted within 
the framework of the Fourth National State Action 
Plan Open Alliance for Open Government / Open 
Government Partnership. In its turn, the ICT Ministry 
of Colombia formally requested the subjects of the 
Access to Information Law to provide on their official 
websites an identification of information specifically of 
interest for women.
As to the mandated role of the oversight institution, 
a worrisome phenomenon is the significant decrease 
since 2021 in the proportion of countries and 
territories that require to publish an annual report, 
to provide implementation guidance to the public 
officials, to engage in raising public awareness and 
even to keep statistics.
For ensuring optimum Access to Information, it remains 
crucial to assess, both qualitatively and quantitatively, the implementation of the right, so that countries and 
territories can take corrective actions where needs 
be. An important indicator that can help monitor 
effectiveness of the oversight bodies is the availability 
of data on the number of requests received by them 
and the manner they were responded. Out of the 114 
responding countries and territories with access to 
information guarantees in 2022, only 51 (45%) could 
provide precise data on the number of requests; 
moreover, 12 of these 51 responses (24%) were not 
based on the year 2021 as reporting year, submitting 
instead data from 2020, 2019, or even from 2018, as 
the latest available. Of the remaining 63 countries 
and territories without data, it is important to note 
that quite a few respondents still confirmed keeping 
statistics on requests and/or appeals, even though 
they were unable to mobilize such data for the survey 
response. 
From the data collected in 2022, 39 countries and 
territories reported that the majority of requests for 
information were granted (3,531,063 or 77% of the 
received requests) in full or in part. Although the range 
of the number of requests for information received 
is tremendous – from several requests to hundreds 
of thousands per year per country or territory, these 
figures generally show that there is both the demand 
for and positive response by these countries and 
territories in implementing access to information 
guarantees. 
In 2022, 59 out of the 103 oversight institutions 
reportedly confirmed that they had received reports 
on requests for information from the public bodies 
(ministry/agency/department) at the national level.
Thus, a stable proportion of about three quarters of 
all requests for information being granted can be 
observed from the survey. However, this is based on 
rather small number of countries and territories that 
provided statistics on the numbers of actual requests 
submitted.
The results of the survey also demonstrate a 
significant proportion, almost 60 percent, of the 
national executive bodies reporting on requests 
for information to the oversight institutions. Both 
observations still indicate that there is space for 
improvement of the actual situation with the 
responses to individual requests for information. 21
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)03
ACCESS TO 
INFORMATION 
REPORTING IN 
VOLUNTARY
NATIONAL 
REVIEWS
We must encourage governments to adopt access to information laws and support the 
implementation of such guarantees when they already exist. Importantly, we must also 
ensure that capacities and resources exist to ensure that legal frameworks translate 
into real access to information and this real benefits for citizens.
Tawfik Jelassi , UNESCO’s Assistant Director-General for Communication and Information35
35 https://en.unesco.org/news/iduai-2021-urgent-need-expand-access-information-laws-and-their-effective-implementation22
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
encourages countries to “conduct regular and inclusive 
reviews of progress at the national and sub-national 
levels, which are country-led and country-driven”. In 
this regard, Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs)36 serve 
as a follow-up and review mechanism through which 
countries assess and present progress in achieving the 
SDGs. Countries present the VNRs voluntarily, at the 
UN High-level Political Forum (HLPF) on Sustainable 
Development, an annual meeting under the auspices 
of the UN’s Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).37
In 2022, out of 44 countries that submitted their 
reviews, 25 responded in the survey that they 
have a constitutional, statutory and/or other legal 
guarantee that recognizes access to information as 
a fundamental right.38 The VNRs of 17 countries (39%) 
describe ‘access to information’ activity, including nine 
referring to their national law on access to information.
Some countries, although not reporting on SDG 
indicator 16.10.2 in their VNRs, still pointed to progress 
on access to information in other contexts, such as in 
relation to access to education, healthcare, countering 
corruption, availability of business opportunities, etc.One of the countries that reported on SDG 16.10.2 in 
2022 is Malawi . The country reported having enacted 
appropriate legislation and developed the necessary 
regulations and guidelines to guarantee access to 
information. The national Access to Information Act, 
which became fully operationalized in January 2021, 
is said to provide step-by-step procedures that are 
to be followed by information holders as well as 
information users in the exercise and fulfilment of the 
right to access to information. The country reported 
that the oversight institution is the Human Rights 
Commission, which has since carried out a number 
of awareness raising and capacity building initiatives 
to ensure popularization and smooth operation of 
access to information. In addition, over 5,000 copies 
of the Act,40 which includes the Regulations, have 
been distributed. The Act has also been translated 
into one vernacular (Chichewa) language to facilitate 
accessibility. Despite the efforts being made, reports 
the VNR, it is worth noting that most people are still 
not fully aware of what is required for one to request 
for, and access information. The report points to the 
challenge of improving governance systems ‘through 
mind-set change programmes, citizen empowerment 
and implementation of the Access to Information Act.’41  
Greece  reported that ensuring the right to public 
access to information is a key priority of the 
Government. Constitutional provisions (art. 5.1, 5a 
of the Constitution42), ratification of international 
conventions (United Nations Economic Commission 
for Europe Convention on Access to Information, 
Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to 
Justice in Environmental Matters, Aarhus Convention), 
and national legislation, including the transposition of 
European Union directives (law 4727/2020 on digital 
governance), ‘shape the recent operating framework 
of a digital governance rooted in the principles of 
transparency, equality, protection of personal data and 
accessibility.’ A special emphasis is put on accessibility 
of information online for people with disabilities and for 
the inhabitants of insular and mountainous regions.43
36 https://hlpf.un.org/vnrs
37 https://hlpf.un.org
38 Full Reports by The Gambia and Tuvalu are not assessed due to their 
unavailability on the VNR Database as of August 2022.
39 Full Reports by The Gambia and Tuvalu are not assessed due to their 
unavailability on the VNR Database as of August 2022.40 Population of Malawi comprises just under 20 million. https://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=MW
41 Malawi VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/
Malawi%202022%20Voluntary%20National%20Review%20%28VNR%29%20
Report.pdf  
42 Greek Constitution, https://www.constituteproject.org/constitution/
Greece_2008.pdf?lang=en
43 Greece VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/VNR%20
2022%20Greece%20Report.pdf .FIGURE 11. Number of countries that reported on SDG 
16.10.2 in VNRs from 2019 to 202239
24
6
171814
Africa
Europe & North America Latin America & the CaribbeanArab States Asia & the Pacific23
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)In its turn, Ghana reported that since the application of its 2019 Right to Information Act began in January 2020, a 
total of 223 information requests have been formulated to 47 government institutions. Out of these, 180 (80.72%) 
information requests were granted.45
In order to guarantee the right of access to information, Côte d’Ivoire  in 2013 adopted the Law on access to 
information of public interest, according to the country’s VNR report.46 For the operationalization of this framework, 
all stakeholders participated in activities to popularize the law and were trained on the legal and regulatory 
mechanisms relating to access to information. The Government’s efforts have consisted in the implementation 
of an ‘open government’ strategy, with the establishment of a number of access to information platforms.47 
With regard to the proportion of responses given by the Government to formal requests for information or 
documents each year, the examination of activity reports produced by public bodies revealed that they received 
154,948 requests in 2021 compared to 37,536 in 2020 and 8,820 in 2017.48 The main good practice is proactive 
dissemination through the monitoring of the websites of public bodies and updated sites, which allows citizens 
to have better access to public documents and information of public interest.
Several countries reported that thanks to a better access to information, they are steadily improving their place 
in the Perception of Corruption Index of 180 countries by the NGO Transparency International.49
45 Ghana VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/VNR%202022%20Ghana%20Report_0.pdf . 
46 Côte d’Ivoire VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/VNR%202022%20Cote%20dIvoire%20Report_0.pdf . 
47 data.gouv.ci , http:/eadministration.gouv.ci  and others
48 https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/VNR%202022%20Cote%20dIvoire%20Report_0.pdf .
49 The Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) is a global corruption ranking carried out by the NGO Transparency International. It measures how corrupt each 
country’s public sector is perceived to be, according to experts and businesspeople. See more: https://www.transparency.org/en/news/how-cpi-scores-are-
calculated . The latest CPI is for 2021: https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2021 . 
50 The UN Security Council adopted a resolution 2626 (2022) to secure a formal presence in Afghanistan, whose current de facto authorities are unrecognized 
by the international community. https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N22/291/52/PDF/N2229152.pdf?OpenElementFIGURE 12. SDG 16.10.2 Reporting in the VNRs (2019-2022)
Country
Afghanistan50
Algeria
Andorra 
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus 
Bhutan
Botswana 
Bulgaria
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Chile
Colombia
Congo (Republic of the)2021
2019
2022
2021
2020, 2022
2020
2019
2021
2020
2022
2021
2022
2020
2021
2019, 2022
2019
2021
2019







 










 









**
*


*Year of 
VNRsAdopted a specific Access 
to Information law for public 
access to informationReported on “Adoption 
of Access to Information 
guarantees”
Marked in a dashboard as making progress, but 
without any details Reported on “Access 
to Information 
Implementation”*24
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)Country
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Czechia
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea 
Eswatini 
Ethiopia 
Gabon 
Gambia
Ghana
Greece 
Grenada 
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Iceland
Indonesia
Israel51
Italy 
Jamaica 
Japan
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia 
Lesotho
Liberia 
Luxembourg 
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia2019, 2022
2019
2021
2021
2021
2022
2022
2021
2020
2022
2022
2022
2022
2022
2022
2020, 2022
2019, 2022
2022
2022
2022
2019
2019
2019
2021
2019
2022
2022
2021
2022
2022
2020
2019
2020
2022
2019, 2022
2022
2022
2021
2020, 2022
2021
















*** 





















*


*

*










*


Year of 
VNRsAdopted a specific Access 
to Information law for public 
access to informationReported on “Adoption 
of Access to Information 
guarantees”Reported on “Access 
to Information 
Implementation”*
51 Israel withdrew from UNESCO on 31 December 201825
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)Country
Mali 
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia (Federated
States of)
Mongolia
Montenegro 
Morocco
Namibia
Netherlands 
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Norway
Pakistan 
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Qatar
Republic of Moldova
Rwanda
San Marino
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Timor-Leste2022
2021
2019
2021
2020
2019
2022
2020
2021
2022
2019
2021
2021
2022
2019
2020
2020
2021
2020
2019, 2022
2021
2020
2019
2021
2022
2022
2020
2021
2022
2019
2021
2022
2022
2022
2021
2022
2021
2019 




















 


















 
**
*

*




 







**
*Year of 
VNRsAdopted a specific Access 
to Information law for public 
access to informationReported on “Adoption 
of Access to Information 
guarantees”Reported on “Access 
to Information 
Implementation”*
Marked as making progress, but without any 
details26
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)52 Karanicolas, Michael & Kwoka, Margaret B., Overseeing Oversight, Connecticut Law Review , Volume 54, May 2022, Number 3, p.679.04Country
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Tuvalu
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
United Republic of 
Tanzania
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Zambia
Zimbabwe2022
2019
2021
2019
2022
2022
2019
2019
2021, 2022
2019
2020
2021 






 








 





Year of 
VNRsAdopted a specific Access 
to Information law for public 
access to informationReported on “Adoption 
of Access to Information 
guarantees”Reported on “Access 
to Information 
Implementation”*
*For the purpose of this report, implementation here refers to either implementation of Access to Information legal guarantees 
or implementation of access to information in a broader view, including by countries that have not adopted an Access to 
Information guarantee. However, this report does not include any review on SDG 9.C which focuses on access to ICT by 
measuring the “proportion of population covered by a mobile network, by technology”. 
** The implementation aspect reported by these countries is more related to ‘access to media and ICT’, and other human-
rights issues, rather than ‘access to information held by public authorities’ as inscribed in SDG 16.10.2
*** Reported on the Constitution guaranteeing Access to Information
Access to information reporting, such as in VNRs, facilitates sharing of knowledge of the good practices. 
Experts believe, that although every state operates in its own specific administrative and institutional context, 
‘the experiences of other countries in combating common challenges to the right to information, particularly 
concerning how to promote compliance and a culture of openness, can be instructive in considering possible 
avenues to reform.’5227
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)04
USING ACCESS TO 
INFORMATION TO 
ADVANCE THE SDGS: 
CASE STUDIES AND 
GOOD PRACTICES28
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)4.1. Privacy rights and 
processing of information in 
the digital environment =
According to the right to privacy , no one shall be 
subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his 
or her privacy, family, home or correspondence.53
Data-intensive technologies contribute to creating 
a digital environment in which both governments 
and business enterprises are increasingly able to 
track, analyze, predict and even manipulate people’s 
behavior to an unprecedented degree, thus presenting 
very significant risks for human dignity, autonomy and 
privacy, if applied without effective safeguards. 
At the same time, Internet and digital technologies 
provide enormous opportunities to enable and 
reinforce the right of access to information and 
proactive dissemination thereof. For example, currently 
all 136 countries and territories under review in the 
Global Right to Information Rating54 allow for requests 
for information  to be submitted by any means of 
communication, including online,55 which is an enabling 
element of the access procedure but also requiring 
safeguards for the privacy of the requestors. 
The potential offered by digital technologies to enable 
access to public information is well-illustrated by 
Greece  in its 2022 VNR. The country informed the High-
Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development on 
the recent digital governance policy initiatives (related 
to SDG 16.6 and SDG 16.10), established by law. These 
include:
(i) Digital Accessibility , regulating the accessibility 
requirements of the websites and mobile 
applications of public sector bodies;  (ii) Open Data : extending the principles of open 
availability and re-usability of documents, 
information and data that are either in the 
possession of public bodies, or funded by public 
resources;  
(iii) Digital Transparency  - The Transparency 
Programme, which obliges all government 
institutions to upload their acts and decisions on 
the Internet, otherwise they are not valid;  
(iv) creation of the National Register of 
Procedures that aims at recording, mapping and 
modelling the administrative procedures of the 
State in a transparent way, while there can be no 
deviation from any competent public authority in 
the implementation of the registered procedures; 
and  
(v) establishment of the Register of Greek Public 
Administration Websites  that is fully accessible 
to the public authorities and legal and natural 
persons via the Unified Digital Portal of Public 
Administration (GOV.GR).56 
Another example is Sri Lanka , where according to 
countries Voluntary National Report public institutions 
were able to lead innovative solutions to enhance 
public access to delivery of services and access to 
information via digitalization efforts. These efforts have 
been accelerated due to the COVID-19 pandemic.57
Still, the rapid pace of technological development 
enhances the capacity of governments, business 
enterprises and individuals to take up new and 
emerging technologies , such as those developed in the 
fields of surveillance, artificial intelligence, automated 
decision-making and machine-learning and of 
profiling, tracking and biometrics, including facial and 
emotional recognition, for surveillance, interception, 
hacking and data collection. When applied without 
proper safeguards, such practice may violate or abuse 
all human rights, but in particular – the right to privacy 
and the right of access to information. It is therefore 
an issue of increasing public concern with regard to 
the intrusiveness and impact of contemporary data-
gathering practices. 
This is highlighted in the Tashkent Declaration on 
Universal Access to Information, adopted at the 
International Day for Universal Access to Information 
2022 global conference, which advocates for digital 
policies guided by openness, universal internet 53 See article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 17 of 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
54 The Right to Information Rating is a programme founded by Access Info 
Europe (AIE) and the Centre for Law and Democracy (CLD). It is based 
on 61 discrete indicators – each looking at a particular feature of a strong 
legal regime for ATI – divided into seven main categories – namely Right 
of Access, Scope, Requesting Procedure, Exceptions & Refusals, Appeals, 
Sanctions & Protections, and Promotional Measures. The central idea 
behind the Rating is to provide ATI advocates, reformers, legislators and 
others with a tool for comparatively assessing the overall strength of 
a legal framework for Access to Information. The Rating indicates the 
strengths and weaknesses of the legal framework, and provides a means 
for pinpointing areas in need of improvement. See more: https://www.rti-
rating.org/. 
53 See: https://www.rti-rating.org/country-data/by-indicator/15/ .56 Greece VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/VNR%20
2022%20Greece%20Report.pdf . 
57 Sri Lanka VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/
VNR%202022%20Sri%20Lanka%20Report.pdf . 29
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)access, transparency, accountability, multilingualism, 
inclusiveness, and gender equality based on the 
concept of Internet Universality outlined in the 
UNESCO ROAM principles.58 These and other 
challenges to privacy rights in the digital world were 
noted in the Global survey on internet privacy and 
freedom of expression59, commissioned by UNESCO 
and published ten years ago. The publication explored 
international law and the national practice in terms of 
respecting privacy on the Internet, considering potential 
conflicts with other rights, in particular freedom of 
information. It contained recommendations to states 
and corporations for better practice based on authors’ 
research and consultations. The recommendations 
covered legal and regulatory measures, corporate 
policy and practice and awareness raising.
The authors of the Global survey on internet privacy 
and freedom of expression  pointed to important 
differences between protection of privacy and data 
protection rules. The latter are designed to address 
the specific problems that can arise when public or 
private bodies engage in the systematic collection 
of data about individuals. Data protection rules 
are different from privacy, both in their scope and 
substantive rules. Data protection applies only to the 
automated processing of personally identifying data. 
The problem that the authors of the Report saw is 
that, unlike legal interpretations of the right to privacy, 
data protection rules do not recognize a general public 
interest override or an exemption from the main rules 
where data processing is carried out for journalistic, 
artistic or literary purposes, as necessary to respect 
the right to freedom of expression, including freedom 
of information. 
In Africa , the Declaration of Principles on Freedom of 
Expression and Access to Information in Africa  pointed 
out that ‘freedom of expression and privacy are 
mutually reinforcing rights that are essential for human 
dignity and the overall promotion and protection of 
human and peoples’ rights.’ While everyone has the 
right to privacy, including the confidentiality of their 
communications and the protection of their personal 
information, proclaimed the Declaration, privacy laws 
shall not to inhibit the dissemination of information of 
public interest.60So far, only about half of African countries and 
territories have adopted laws to protect personal 
data. Even then, in many countries and territories, 
the laws are yet to be fully operationalized through 
the adoption of implementing regulations.62 Some of 
these laws in countries such as Chad, Kenya, South 
Africa, Tunisia, Uganda, and Zimbabwe, prohibit the 
collection of certain categories of personal data, 
including specific types of biometric data generally, or 
whenever certain conditions are not complied with.63  
In Kenya , the public discussion over safety of the data 
related to issuance of ID cards, including regarding 
measures needed to avoid abuse of personal data for 
commercial benefit, has influenced on the delays in 
the entry into force of the relevant law (‘the Huduma 
Bill’) since 2021. Most recently, the Court of Appeal in 
its ruling acknowledged that the bill had complied to 
the provisions of Data Protection Act in respect to data 
protection impact assessment.65
58 The UNESCO conference in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, discussed access 
to information in the digital era, https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/
unesco-conference-tashkent-discussed-access-information-digital-
era?hub=66657  
59 https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000218273.locale=en . 
60 Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression and Access to 
Information in Africa , adopted by the African Commission on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights (the African Commission) at its 65th Ordinary Session (21 
October to 10 November 2019, Banjul, The Gambia), Preamble, Principles 21 
and 40, https://www.achpr.org/legalinstruments/detail?id=69 .61 Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression and Access to 
Information in Africa , adopted by the African Commission on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights (the African Commission) at its 65th Ordinary Session (21 
October to 10 November 2019, Banjul, The Gambia), Principle 42 (2), https://
www.achpr.org/legalinstruments/detail?id=69 . 
62 Collaboration on International ICT Policy for East & Southern Africa, 
Mapping and Analysis of Privacy Laws in Africa, November 2021, p. 7, 
https://cipesa.org/?wpfb_dl=479
63 Ibid., p. 35.
65 Rotich, Kenneth, How Huduma Bill ensures protection of data , The 
Standard, 5 June 2022, https://www.standardmedia.co.ke/sports/amp/
opinion/2001447199/how-huduma-bill-ensures-protection-of-dataFIGURE 13. Principles of processing personal 
information in Africa.61
The processing of personal 
information shall by law be:
a. with the consent of the individual 
concerned;
b. conducted in a lawful and fair manner;
c. in accordance with the purpose for 
which it was collected, and adequate, 
relevant and not excessive;
d. accurate and updated, and where 
incomplete, erased or rectified;
e. transparent and disclose the personal 
information held; and
f. confidential and kept secure at all
 times30
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)In Uganda , 2019 the Data Protection and Privacy Act 
lists obtaining or disclosing personal data in an unlawful 
manner as an offence punishable by a fine of UGX 
4.8 million (USD 1,327) or imprisonment for 10 years or 
both. The 2015 Registration of Persons Act, in addition, 
provides sanctions for breach of personal data: an 
officer of the National Identification and Registration 
Authority who discloses, submits, or transfers data 
from the register to an outsider, commits an offence 
and is liable on conviction to a fine of up to UGX 1.44 
million (USD 408) or imprisonment of up to five years 
or both.66
A change in approach as to the transparency of 
collecting personal information by private companies 
is currently under way in European Union countries  
where the national law will mirror the provisions of a 
number of the European Union legislative instruments, 
including the Digital Markets Act (DMA), the Digital 
Services Act (DSA), the Data Governance Act (DGA) 
and the Data Act. They are designed in full compliance 
with existing rules on data protection, including the 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the 
ePrivacy Directive67. European regulation is based on 
the idea that the data subjects —the citizens— must 
be in control of their own data by means of a set of 
rights that need to be actively guaranteed, by both 
private or state actors when they use their data, as 
well as a body of principles that shape and impose 
limits to every personal data processing activity.
In particular, under the new rules of the Digital 
Services Act, providers of online platforms that are 
accessible to minors will be required to put in place 
appropriate measures to ensure high level of privacy 
on their services. Platforms will no longer present 
advertisements to their users based on profiling that 
rests on special categories of personal data, such as 
their ethnicity, political views or sexual orientation.68
The role of private entities  in gatekeeping personal 
information, as well as artificial intelligence (AI) 
that they employ as an instrument of their business 
models, increases.69 The right of access to information 
is traditionally viewed by many constitutional norms and relevant laws as a right to access to information 
held by public authorities. This view, however, may no 
longer reflect the reality of how personal information is 
held and processed, which calls for a new approach to 
the regulation of collection and storage of and access 
to private data. This is particularly significant in light 
of the collection of data by social media platforms 
and apps whenever users provide information about 
themselves – knowingly or not.70 
On 7 October 2021, the UN Human Rights Council 
(UNHRC) adopted a resolution on ‘The right to privacy 
in the digital age’ . Its adoption was triggered, in 
particular, by the Council’s concern that individuals 
‘often do not and/or cannot provide their free, explicit 
and informed consent to the collection, processing and 
storage of their data or to the re-use, sale or multiple 
re-sale of their personal data, as the collecting, 
processing, use, storage and sharing of personal data, 
including sensitive data, has increased significantly in 
the digital age’. Such worries were recently aggravated 
when assessing the technological means, developed 
or deployed in response to disasters, epidemics and 
pandemics, especially the COVID-19 pandemic, 
including digital exposure notification and contact 
tracing. The UNHRC resolution noted that ‘violations 
and abuses of the right to privacy in the digital age can 
affect all individuals, with effects on women, children, 
persons with disabilities and older persons, as well 
as persons in vulnerable situations and marginalized 
groups.71
Historically marginalized groups may be more 
susceptible to data discrimination despite existing 
laws. Data generated from individuals’ use of Internet-
of-Things devices and associated mobile applications 
combined with other sources of information could 
also be used to enable discrimination and negatively 
impact the opportunities that individuals receive.72
There is an increasing intersection of the right of 
access to information and the right to privacy, which 
has recently become evident and important due to 
the growth of the Internet and digital technologies , 
particularly concerning the collection and processing 
66 Collaboration on International ICT Policy for East & Southern Africa, 
Mapping and Analysis of Privacy Laws in Africa, November 2021, p. 40, 
https://cipesa.org/?wpfb_dl=479
67 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/digital-privacy
68 See: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
QANDA_20_2348  
69 See for a discussion of the relevance of AI to RTI and privacy, Article 19 
and Privacy International, “Privacy and freedom of expression in an age 
of artificial intelligence” (London, 2018); Human Rights council, “Report of 
the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to 
freedom of opinion and expression” UN Doc A/73/348 (29 August 2018).70 Human Rights Council, “Disinformation and freedom of opinion and 
expression: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and 
protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression” UN Doc A/
HRC/47/25 (13 April 2021) at [66].
71 See https://undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=A%2FHRC%2FRES% 
2F48%2F4&Language=E&DeviceType= Desktop&LangRequested=False .
72 Elvy, Stacy-Ann , Data privacy and the Internet of Things, 9 February 2022, 
https://en.unesco.org/inclusivepolicylab/analytics/data-privacy-and-
internet-things . 31
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)of information, including personal data. The evolving 
communication landscape – in the context of privacy 
rights and access to information – also points to the 
digital and online tools and platforms continuing to 
further dominate how private information is created, 
stored and shared.
 4.2. Focusing on Small Island 
Developing States
According to the information from Global Right to 
Information Rating73, 18 UN Member States that are 
SIDS in the region have adopted statutory guarantees 
for public access to information.74 Nine Small Island 
Developing States (SIDS)75 responded to the UNESCO 
survey in 2022, and seven more submitted VNRs.76 
Among these countries, eight countries have Access 
to Information laws and one is in the process of 
elaborating such a law. 
The Voluntary National Report of Sao Tome and 
Principe, states that ‘the Public Transparency System 
of the country, is based on the Access to Information 
Law (Law No. 9.871/2012), which aims to promote state 
transparency and ensure that all citizens have access 
to public information. Therefore, in Sao Tome and 
Principe there are constitutional and legal guarantees 
so that access to public information is guaranteed 
to all. Sao Tome and Principe has a Human Rights 
institution, but it has not yet been accredited.’77
Six countries also reported having a dedicated 
oversight institution. For three of these countries, the 
oversight institution takes the form of an Information 
Commission. Five countries reported that their legal 
guarantee on Access to Information specifies the need 
for public bodies to also appoint public information 
officers or a specific unit to handle requests for 
information. Five countries reported provisions for the 
dedicated Access to Information oversight institutions 
to provide monitoring of access to information 
implementation.A report, prepared by the United Nations Pacific 
Regional Anti-Corruption Project, a joint initiative by the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) 
and United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP), provides an insight into the state of access 
to information in 14 Small Island Developing States in 
the Pacific Region.78 Under the Pacific Plan 2005,79 UN 
Pacific Strategy80 and 2018 Boe Declaration81, countries 
in the Pacific are urged to put strategies in place to 
implement and/or monitor access to information 
legislation. The report reviews laws on access to 
information in the Cook Islands, Fiji, Palau and Vanuatu, 
as well as draft laws in Micronesia and the Solomon 
Islands. It notes that that even the Pacific Small Island 
Developing State without access to information laws 
have environment ‘generally favourable to the public’s 
exercising of their right to information’.82 For example, 
UNESCO is providing technical assistance to Samoa 
through the India-UN Development Partnership Fund 
supported programme, which is paving the way for 
the Government’s on a freedom of information act, 
with the Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology (M.C.I.T.) leading the way.83
The report also provides an analysis of the 
implementation of the laws. It points to a number of 
areas that need improvement or require availability 
of additional data.84 One of the conclusions of the 
report is that ‘[n]otwithstanding a well-designed law, 
inadequate resources and lack of budgetary support 
can stymie implementation.’ 85
73 See footnote 54.
74 See https://www.rti-rating.org/country-data/ . 
75 See https://en.unesco.org/sids/about  
76 Full Report by Vanuatu is not assessed due to its unavailability on the VNR 
Database as of August 2022.
77 Sao Tome and Principe, VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/
vnrs/2022/VNR%202022%20Sao%20Tome%20and%20Principe%20Report.
pdf. 78 Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall 
Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Samoa, Solomon 
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
79 The Pacific Plan was endorsed by Leaders at the Pacific Islands Forum 
meeting in 2005, and includes initiative 12.3 to enhance governance 
mechanisms such as FOI. See: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/
linked-documents/robp-pacific-2013-2015-pacific-plan.pdf . 
80 Outcome 5 of the UN Pacific Strategy is that people and communities 
in the Pacific will contribute to and benefit from inclusive, informed, and 
transparent decision-making processes. See: United Nations in the Pacific. 
2017. United Nations Pacific Strategy (2018 – 2022), https://unsdg.un.org/
resources/united-nations-pacific-strategy-2018-2022 . 
81 The Boe Declaration Action Plan includes the adoption and implementation 
of constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access 
to information as a measure for success in ensuring peace and security 
across the region. See Boe Declaration on Regional Security (2018): https://
www.forumsec.org/boe-declaration-on-regional-security/ . 
82 Status of the Right to Information in Pacific Island Countries, UNODC, 
2020, p. 5, https://www.unodc.org/documents/southeastasiaandpacific/
pacific/2020/UN-PRAC_Paper_-_Status_of_Right_to_Information_in_
Pacific_Island_Countries.pdf .
83 https://www.samoaobserver.ws/category/samoa/62468
84 Status of the Right to Information in Pacific Island Countries, UNODC, 2020, 
pp. 39-47, https://www.unodc.org/documents/southeastasiaandpacific/
pacific/2020/UN-PRAC_Paper_-_Status_of_Right_to_Information_in_
Pacific_Island_Countries.pdf .
85 Status of the Right to Information in Pacific Island Countries, UNODC, 
2020, p. 5, https://www.unodc.org/documents/southeastasiaandpacific/
pacific/2020/UN-PRAC_Paper_-_Status_of_Right_to_Information_in_
Pacific_Island_Countries.pdf .32
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)4.3.National Focus: Access to 
information in Armenia as 
an instrument to counter 
disinformation
As the COVID-19 pandemic has so vividly shown, access 
to information has the potential to save lives. The 
crisis has underlined how reliable information readily 
available in multiple languages, including indigenous 
languages, can address surges in disinformation. It has 
also underscored those immediate measures must be 
catered to those most in need, including persons with 
disabilities.86
Surges in disinformation have recently become 
widespread and, heavily relying on social media, 
contribute to a global information disorder.87 In a 
way, social media create bubbles which are affecting 
people’s access to diverse information, as observed by 
Latvia in its 2022 VNR.88
The UN General Assembly (UNGA) adopted in 2021 a 
resolution,89 that stresses that responses to the spread 
of disinformation must comply with international 
human rights law and the principles of legality, 
necessity and proportionality. Moreover they should 
promote and protect everyone’s freedom of expression 
and freedom to information – and not violate it. Free, 
independent, plural and diverse media and access to 
independent, factual and evidence-based information 
are, in fact, important to counter disinformation. 
According to the 2021 ‘Disinformation and 
misinformation in Armenia’ study from Freedom 
House90, countering disinformation and spread of 
misconceptions in the country is reportedly effective 
when public institutions disseminate fast, coordinated and non-contradictory information. It is successful 
when the authorities provide strategic communication 
in responding to journalists’ inquiries, available 
‘procedures and mechanisms for responding to the 
information circulated in the public domain.’ Otherwise, 
according to the study, people remain vulnerable to 
false narratives that fill the information vacuum.91
Such needs served as a reason for Armenia to become 
the first among the countries of the European Union 
Eastern Partnership92 to develop a national strategy 
to combat disinformation, including through better 
access to information. It was presented for public 
discussion at an event organized in Yerevan in July 
2022 by the Public Relations and Information Center 
of the Prime Minister’s Office and the Freedom of 
Information Center with the support of the Center for 
International Private Enterprise.93
There have been a number of initiatives and projects 
aimed at tackling disinformation, however they all 
had a common disadvantage: the efforts have been 
fragmented and uncoordinated, consequently, their 
impact was so. As a result, the Armenian civil society 
and the government initiated the development of the 
Strategy against Disinformation for creating strategic 
responses and building national resilience. The strategy 
unites the efforts of the government, civil society and 
citizens to combat disinformation’.95
The prime pillar of the draft strategy, is ‘strengthening 
the capabilities of public institutions of Armenia 
to detect, analyze and expose disinformation’ 
by improving the strategic communication in the 
government agencies, strengthen the human, financial 
and technical resources of their public communication 
departments, improving the proactive transparency 
of government agencies and introducing a self-
assessment and evaluation system of transparency 
and accountability of the government agencies.
86 The Information for All Programme of UNESCO tackles disinformation 
through impactful projects that promote access to information and digital 
literacy, 18 June 2021, 
  https://en.unesco.org/news/information-all-programme-unesco-tackles-
disinformation-through-impactful-projects-promote . 
87 Information Disorder: Toward an interdisciplinary framework for research 
and policymaking. By Claire Wardle and Hossein Derakhshan. Published 
by the Council of Europe, October 2017, https://rm.coe.int/information-
disorder-report-november-2017/1680764666 . 
88 Latvia, VNR 2022, https://hlpf.un.org/sites/default/files/vnrs/2022/VNR%20
2022%20Latvia%20Report%201.pdf
89	‘Countering	disinformation	for	the	promotion	and	protection	of	human	
rights and fundamental freedoms’, UN General Assembly resolution, A/
RES/76/227, 24 December 2021, https://undocs.org/A/RES/76/227
90 Freedom House, Disinformation and Misinformation in Armenia, https://
freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/2021-06/Disinformation-in-Armenia_
En-v3.pdf . 91 Freedom of Information Center, National Strategy Against Disinformation 
2022-2024, Yerevan, 2022. 27 pp.
92 https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/eastern-partnership_en
93 http://www.foi.am/en/news/item/2274/
95 http://www.foi.am/en/news/item/2252/33
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)4.4.National Focus: Mandating 
proactive release of 
information in Australia96
The proactive disclosure of government information 
ensures transparency, accountability and provides a 
necessary assurance that elected officials and other 
publicly funded senior decision makers, place the public 
interest above their private interests as demanded by, 
and expected of, public office. Importantly, disclosure 
of interests minimizes the risk of fraud and corruption.
Under the national Constitution, the constituent 
states of the Commonwealth of Australia essentially 
have power to legislate on many subjects, in 
particular with respect to public services and local 
government. To take one example, in New South 
Wales, a southeastern state of the Commonwealth of 
Australia, the Government Information (Public Access) 
Act 2009  requires that government agencies publish 
information proactively. Independent oversight of 
these requirements is essential to addressing risks of 
corruption. As new integrity issues arise it is important 
that mandated proactive disclosure requirements 
respond to those risks and relevant public interest 
considerations in favour of disclosure. Contemporary 
risks to integrity include the use of machine learning. 
The Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009  
applies to all New South Wales government agencies, 
and also extends to Ministers and their staff, local 
councils, state-owned corporations, courts in their 
non-judicial functions, and to certain public authorities, 
such as universities.97
The oversight of its implementation is vested upon 
the Information Commissioner. In particular, under the 
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009 , 
local councils must publish information about the 
returns of pecuniary interests lodged by councilors 
and designated persons. Upon becoming aware of 
non-compliance with these requirements the New 
South Wales Information Commissioner undertook 
a compliance audit. The resultant education and 
governance recommendations have secured greater 
levels of transparency and accountability. Contract registers can contribute to improved 
performance of outsourced services, increased 
efficiency and value for money. They are also an 
important tool to proactively manage potential 
conflicts of interest and ensure that public value is 
demonstrably realized. Similarly, the acquisition and 
disposal of major assets by agencies present integrity 
risks warranting specific disclosure requirements under 
any access to information regime. When the New South 
Wales Information Commissioner became aware of 
possible non-compliance with contract disclosure 
requirements by the New South Wales Government’s 
insurance and care scheme provider and undertook 
compliance audits. The agency’s implementation of 
the Information Commissioner’s recommendations has 
resulted in systemic improvements in accountability 
and transparency. 
Increasingly the care and protection of the environment 
is a significant matter of public interest and in some 
jurisdictions, agencies are required to publish waste 
management and other environmental plans. 
The Information and Privacy Commission of New 
South Wales has identified and promoted some key 
practices to promote proactive release including:
• Encourage a corporate culture of transparency 
and accountability (e.g., through a code of 
conduct or mission statement)
• Establish clear governance arrangements to 
manage the proactive release of documents 
(e.g., establish a working group; include 
proactive release as a standard agenda 
item in senior management meetings; place 
responsibility for proactive release in specific 
roles including risk management and audit 
functions)
• Incorporate proactive release as part of records 
management and business systems
• Consider, from the outset, whether documents 
should be proactively released
• Engage with stakeholders to establish 
information release priorities (e.g., through 
community surveys, workshops and consultation 
processes)
• Analyze data collected from across public 
institutions on requests for information, to 
identify trends and documents that could be 
released proactively.98
96 Based on the information provided to UNESCO by Elizabeth Tydd, CEO, 
Information Commissioner from the New South Wales Information and 
Privacy Commission in Australia. 
97 https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/resources/government-information-public-
access-act-2009-gipa-act  98 See https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/fact-sheet-authorised-proactive-release-
government-information  34
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)All Australian Information Commissioners and Ombudsmen collectively issued in 2021 a Statement of Principles 
to support proactive disclosure of government-held information (see Figure 15)99. 
This Statement of Principles has application in all jurisdictions of the Commonwealth of Australia and is 
particularly important in its constituencies that do not mandate proactive release of information under their 
Right to Information legislation.
The Australian case suggests that pro-active disclosure of government-held information becomes an important 
factor for enabling Access to Information as it is an efficient service, which promptly informs the public, increases 
its interest, participation in community life, and eventually – trust and confidence in the public institutions. To be 
appropriate and relevant, such procedures must be required by law and influence the decision-making process. 
Information oversight institutions can play a crucial role in their implementation in practice.
99 Joint Statement of Principles to support proactive disclosure of government-held information – developed by all Australian Information Commissioners 
and Ombudsmen, 24 September 2021, https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/information-access/open-government-open-data-public-participation/statement-of-
principles .
100 Ibid.FIGURE 15. Reasons for pro-active disclosure of information in Australia.100
Principles to support 
disclosure of government-
held information recognize 
that appropriate, prompt 
and proactive disclosure 
of government-held 
information:o informs community, 
o increases participation and 
enhances decision-making, 
o builds trust and confidence, 
o improves service, 
o is required or permitted by 
law, 
o improves efficiency.35
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)CONCLUSION36
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)Conclusion
Reporting on SDG 16.10.2 serves as an incentive for countries and territories to improve 
their legal regulatory frameworks, their implementation and/or their enforcement of 
access to information. In this regard, the UNESCO survey, which provides a standardized 
approach to monitoring SDG 16.10.2, has proven useful for countries and territories in 
measuring and reporting progress on Access to Information at the national level, including 
through the Voluntary National Reviews, the Universal Periodic Review that concerns the 
human rights records. 
Tracking progress on access to information in the past year through legal guarantees and 
their implementation, with a particular focus on the mandates, sustainability and activities 
of national oversight institutions, points to an overall steady progress of countries and 
territories on the path of further enabling public access to information, a UN-recognized 
instrument for sustainable development. As countries and territories make consistent 
efforts to emerge from several crises of the global scale, the role of access to information 
is widely reported by them as critical in strengthening communities and public institutions. 
The need for openness, transparency and accountability remains to be on the top of the 
governmental agendas. This is also a result of the growing public demand for information 
that is accurate, timely, pro-active and reliable. As civic space became less vibrant during 
the COVID-19 pandemic, access to information online has increased and moreover 
significantly helped counterbalance the situation, enabling public participation and civic 
engagement, stability and trust. 
The findings from the UNESCO Survey on Public Access to Information, and voluntary 
national reports (VNRs) in 2022 point to the significant and even growing number and 
ratio of responding countries and territories that indicated having constitutional, statutory 
and/or policy guarantees for access to information. Importantly, these guarantees 
largely include the need for an oversight body and a requirement for the public bodies 
to appoint officers handling access to information issues. These measures facilitate the 
implementation of the guarantees, especially when the oversight body, typically an 
Information Commission or Commissioner, is an independent institution. 
As to the mandated role of the oversight institution, a worrisome situation that needs to be 
further investigated is the significant drop in the proportion of countries and territories that 
require from the oversight body to publish an annual report, to provide implementation 
guidance to the public officials, and/or to engage in raising public awareness and even to 
keep statistics. 
36 A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)37
A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)The survey points to a stable ratio of about three quarters of all requests for information 
being granted worldwide, but this figure is still based on rather small number of countries 
and territories that provided statistics on the numbers of actual requests submitted. 
The report also observes a mutual reinforcement of the right of access to information 
and the right to privacy. Digital and online tools and commercial platforms continue to 
further dominate how private information is created, stored and shared. In 2022, the 
Tashkent Declaration on Universal Access to Information recommended that internet 
intermediaries implement internal policies guided by openness, transparency and respect 
for human rights, including as it concerns data retention, accountability, multilingualism, 
gender equality, and inclusiveness, in particular for persons with disabilities and other 
marginalized and vulnerable groups, as well as to commit to a framework for transparency 
of their algorithms and both human and automated decision-making. 
The report points that data protection is still insufficiently provided for in national and 
international law and policies. Imminent conflicts between the rights of access to 
information and to protect privacy interests are successfully resolved when taking into 
account the role of the public interest in that balance. 
Taken together, the reported efforts made by the global community, firmly put the 
situation with the implementation of the right of access to information on a steady path 
forward, to sustainability and progress.
With less than eight years left to achieve the SDGs, and with global challenges becoming 
even more interconnected, the message is clear that access to information should remain 
to be the link that binds together the diverse actions in rebuilding communities and 
strengthening public institutions towards 2030 and beyond.
37 A Steady Path Forward: UNESCO 2022 Report on Public Access to Information (SDG 16.10.2)